The Chronicle A LUPANE man who fatally struck his neighbour with a log over a debt in 2013 and evaded arrest for six years, has been sentenced to 10 years in jail for culpable homicide. Lameck Ndlovu (41) of Khatshana Village under Chief Mabhikwa committed the crime in May 2013 and fled from the village. His whereabouts were not known until August 2019 when police arrested him after he returned home. The deceased Nhlanhla Nkomo from the same area, was 43 years old when Ndlovu killed him in 2013. Nkomo succumbed to the injuries while in hospital more than a month after the attack. Ndlovu pleaded not guilty to murder and guilty to a lesser charge of culpable homicide when he appeared before Bulawayo High Court Justice Martin Makonese on circuit in Hwange. The judge sentenced Ndlovu to 10 years in jail and suspended two years from the sentence on condition of good behaviour. Prosecuting, Mrs Martha Cheda said the deceased and Ndlovu had a misunderstanding over a debt as they walked home along Kazhana road in Khatshana village. “On the 22nd of March 2013 and around 2am, the accused and deceased were walking home from Mantshalini bus stop where they had disembarked from a bus and where in the company of neighbours Messers Dumisani Ncube, Hloniphani Sibanda, and Mkhululi Maphosa. “Along the way deceased and accused started walking slowly and remained behind. The two started having a misunderstanding over a debt that deceased owed and was overdue,” said Mrs Cheda. The court was told that Ndlovu picked a log and struck Nkomo once on the head and he fell down. Nkomo started bleeding and frothing from the mouth. Ndlovu walked away leaving Nkomo on the scene. Nkomo was later carried home by other villagers and was rushed to Mpilo Central Hospital in Bulawayo where he was admitted. He succumbed to the injuries on July 2 the same year. Ndlovu was arrested in August 2019 and his trial took place during the current circuit. Miss Chikwandare of Mhaka Attorneys represented Ndlovu. -@ncubeleon