The Chronicle Matthew 6:33
But seek first the kingdom of God and His righteousness, and all these things shall be added to you. (NKJV) 2 Peter 1:3
As His divine power has given to us all things that pertain to life and godliness, through the knowledge of Him who called us by glory and virtue, (NKJV) GOD wants you to grow in the knowledge. There are ranks that are surrounded by their own knowledge. You need to get enough knowledge that will qualify you to the rank that you want to be. You sometimes don’t need to pray for money but you need to get knowledge. When you don’t grow spiritually there is no change of spiritual ranks. There are rewards for shifting.  If you are tired of your spiritual circumstances the best way to relocate is by studying the Word.
Joshua 1:8 This Book of the Law shall not depart from your mouth, but you shall meditate in it day and night(NKJV) The word meditate means, to engage in mental exercise for the purpose of reaching a heightened level of spiritual awareness; it’s further investigation. Meditation takes you to the further truth. Each time meditation takes place, the life of God is loaded in you. When the word is in you and situations come to squeeze you, you do not shrivel but you release a Godly aura of overcoming, that of victory. Matthew 6:25 It’s very difficult to keep the gift of life running in you. In the midst of this coronavirus pandemic, surely you must acknowledge the power of God that is released upon your life and your family for free. Matthew 4:4 But He answered and said, “It is written, ‘Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceeds from the mouth of God.”’(NKJV) Have a habit of being alone with your Bible. Exercise maximum discipline. If secular education can give you employment, if those things can change you or somehow deliver you from poverty how much more with divine knowledge. The devil may allow you to get a Bible, but he will not allow you to fathom the wondrous things hidden in it.  The devil knows that once your spiritual eyes open, and you begin to study and understand the Word of God, there will be no stopping you. Study the Word and be unstoppable. God Bless…
eaglelifeassembly@gmail.com