The Chronicle Thandeka Moyo-Ndlovu, Senior Reporter
FULLY vaccinated returning residents and visitors entering the country will no longer be required to present a negative Covid-19 PCR certificate upon arrival at the port of entry. However, those who are unvaccinated will still be required to produce a negative PCR certificate. Prior to the latest development it was mandatory for all travellers entering the country to undergo a valid Covid-19 PCR test not more than 48 hours from the time of their departure for Zimbabwe. Government last month reopened all the country’s borders after announcing that Zimbabwe had successfully contained the fourth Covid-19 wave that was fueled by the Omicron variant. It was more than a year after the country closed its borders due to Covid-19 and a valid negative PRC test result was one of the requirements for entering the country. In her post-Cabinet briefing on Tuesday, Information, Publicity and Broadcasting Services Minister Monica Mutsvangwa said: “Cabinet has resolved that returning residents and visitors are no longer required to present a negative PCR certificate on arrival at ports of entry. Only a valid vaccination certificate showing that they are fully vaccinated against Covid-19 will suffice.  “This is in recognition of the declining Covid-19 new cases, most of which are now very mild or have no symptoms and increasing vaccination coverage. A negative PCR certificate will only be a requirement if the returning resident or visitor is not fully vaccinated. “Government wishes to remind all citizens that Covid-19 is still with us and is, therefore, appealing to all Zimbabweans to continue adhering to the laid down World Health Organisation protocols at all times.” She said the number of cases in need of hospitalisation for Covid-19 continues to decrease, with the country’s bed occupancy rate declining to 1,3 percent during the past week, from 2,3 the previous week. There were no admissions to the intensive care unit in Zimbabwe. “Regarding the national vaccination programme, Cabinet wishes to inform the public that, as of 28 March 2022, a total of  4 917 541 first doses of the Covid-19 vaccine had been administered, while 3 498 431 people had received their second dose. A total of   288 693 third doses have been administered to date. The National Vaccination Blitz saw 481 005 doses being administered between 21 and 25 March, 2022,” said Minister Mutsvangwa. — @thamamoe