The Chronicle Mbulelo Mpofu, Showbiz Reporter
LOCAL rapper Xosti (real name Xolani Tshongwe) promised to have more collaborations in 2022 and he has already delivered his project which features Rethabile Khumalo who is best known for her song with Master KG, Ntyilo Ntyilo. The United Kingdom-based, Bulawayo rapper who has in the past collaborated with DJ Tira and Platform One’s Nani Ntengo, said his song with Rethabile talks about living lavishly and just flexing one’s financial muscle. “It’s always been an idea of mine to work with Rethabile and I’m glad that at last I’ve done it. Our song, Kanti Unjani talks about living softly, having the finest women in town and enjoying what life has to offer. It’s a song with good vibes,” said Xosti. The song is set to be released on Thursday. Its visuals have already been shot so it will be a double treat for lovers of Xosti’s music.  The artiste who rebranded last year bounced back on the music scene with a collaboration with DJ Tira. The two released a gqom track titled Imali Ingenile that was produced by Afrotainment’s Prince Bulo. “Landing an international collaboration is not a walk in the park. One has to have the talent and must put in the work into their craft. Also, artistes need to do away with the mindset that collaborations are all about money because that’s not the case,” said Xosti. He said there is a need for artistes, especially from the city, to dedicate their time to promote their brands. “You cannot talk about wanting to succeed when as an artiste, you’re not pushing your brand and are not visible on social media. Artistes should also give their all in every project they undertake and not be chancers.” The artiste’s music career dates back to 2004 when he worked with Ingwe Studios which was part of Radio Dialogue on his debut album Ughev’omnyama under the stage name Mazia. Xosti who hails from Lupane in Matabeleland North province, relocated to South Africa in 2004 soon after joining the music industry. – @eMKlass_49