The Chronicle Banele and Bandile Mbere, the twin Dj duo collectively known as Major League Djz, celebrate a significant career win, signing with Atlantic Records. The duo has been in the music industry since the early 2010s, and their music catalogue is worth a lot with songs like Slyza Tsotsi and many more. Both stars are now signed to Atlantic Records.  Upon the long announcement they made on their Instagram page, they wrote a small piece for the kids. Major League told kids that anything is possible and that the world is their oyster. What they achieved can be achieved by the next African child elsewhere. Twins also thanked their team for helping them reach their heights. According to the twins, their deal with Atlantic Records is only the beginning. If they work accelerated, they can even win a Grammy Award one day. Of course, this will be a huge career shift, and from now on, their lives are going to change for the better. Another critical factor is that children will look up to the DJ duo for inspiration. Ricky Rick received his flowers from the duo; the twins call him their late brother. When Ricky was still alive, he was with the two helping them in the negotiations process. Since Ricky had sound knowledge and more experience in the music industry, he helped guide them. Major League expressed how they wish he were still alive to see this deal come to life. Of course, they’ll do their best not to disappoint him. The post of the twins in front of the Atlantic Records logo has reached almost 50 000 likes on Instagram so far, and it’s flooded with congratulatory messages. Some of the stars who congratulate them are; the rapper Cassper Nyovest, the amapiano DJ DBN Gogo, the reality show star Faith Nketsi, international producer Master KG, radio presenter LootLove and many more. It seems like South African stars are aiming higher and aiming global. Andile Mpisane announced he’s now signed to Def Jam Recordings Africa. Congratulations to the boys. We know they will kill it. -Savanna News