The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
FORMER Hwange Football Club chairman and treasurer Lovemore Sibanda has died. He was 63.  Sibanda died at his Romney Park home in Bulawayo early Thursday morning after suffering cardiac arrest in his sleep. His elder brother and family spokesperson Chasmell Sibanda confirmed the sudden passing of the down to earth football administrator. “We are still trying to come to terms with what has befallen us as a family. I was with him the whole day on Wednesday and he was in his usual joyful mood with no signs of pain. We knew he was diabetic and managing it very well. He followed the doctor’s prescription to the core, we never thought something this tragic will befall us,” said Chasmell. He said just after midnight, his brother collapsed on his bed. “His wife immediately called an ambulance, but they pronounced him dead upon arrival. This is a dark cloud in our family; we are really saddened and hurt by this tragedy,” said Chasmell. Upon retirement from Hwange Colliery Company, Lovemore ventured into cattle farming. Former Hwange secretary-general Charles Nyala, who worked with Lovemore in the Hwange executive, expressed shock at the news of his former colleague’s death. “We were one family during our time at the football club. I personally admired him for his humbleness and it’s a sad loss to everyone and personally I am in shock. It will take time to settle. My sincere condolences to his wife Memory, family and everyone who knew him,” said Nyala. Lovemore was treasurer and later chairman of Chipangano just after the turn of the millenium. During his time in the Hwange executive, the club produced the 2005 Soccer Star of the Year finalist Takesure Chinyama and the following year there were two players on the calendar, Obert ‘Cobra’ Moyo and Carrington  Gomba. He briefly left football administration only to resurface in 2015 after being appointed club treasurer with Joseph Zulu as chairman. Lovemore is survived by wife Memory and daughter Lorna. Mourners are gathered at number 22 Constable Avenue, Romney Park, Bulawayo.