The Chronicle Mashudu Netsianda in Hwange
PRESIDENT Mnangagwa yesterday commissioned the US$7,3 million SolGas Energy 5 megawatt (MW) solar power plant at Cross Mabale in Hwange district and called on the private sector and diasporans to partner Government through contributing to the country’s infrastructural development.  The solar plant now feeds 5MW of clean renewable energy into the national grid after it recently successfully underwent hot testing. The project is the third independent power producer-developed solar project to be connected to the national grid and the country’s largest. Speaking during the commissioning of the massive solar plant, President Mnangagwa said the project will contribute to the country’s quest to realise energy self-sufficiency as Government accelerates the industrialisation, modernisation and growth of the economy in line with Vision 2030. He said the private sector plays a critical role in national development. “The 5MW solar plant here in Hwange is an example of the importance of private sector players in our national economy. The private sector is indeed a critical partner in our national development agenda and our efforts to achieve our Vision of a prosperous and empowered middle-income economy by 2030,” said President Mnangagwa. “We are therefore pleased to join SolGas and its partner Old Mutual as they celebrate this notable milestone in our national energy matrix. I commend SolGas and Old Mutual for this particular investment here at Cross Mabale in Hwange district and call upon more private sector entities including our citizens in the diaspora and those in the insurance sector to join the development momentum by investing in such key enablers for accelerated economic growth and a higher quality of life for our people.” The President said the investment is in line with the National Renewable Energy Policy which targets increasing the contribution of renewable energy to the electricity supply mix from about six percent in 2019 to 27 percent by 2030. “Solar power is a critical renewable energy source whose deployment and impact must be evident across the length and breadth of Zimbabwe. I commend the determination demonstrated by the investors of this project who persevered to see that this project is completed despite having started in November 2019 just before the Covid-19 pandemic affected the country,” he said. “This is the kind of resilient spirit that the people of our great country are urged to demonstrate as we undertake to the building of our great country. Programmes and projects must be completed, no matter the odds.” Riding on the ongoing deployment of research and development as well as the innovation revolution sweeping across the country, the President challenged other business entities including diasporans with free funds to invest in and support startups by young entrepreneurs. He said on its part Government will continue to provide a conducive operating environment for investors and innovators including increasing transparency in the issuance of licences to power producers as well as well as a broad array of tax and other incentives. “I exhort SolGas and other players in the energy sector to fully utilise these incentives as they strive to complement Government efforts in the provision of diversified energy products and services,” said the President. He said the close cooperation between the Zimbabwe Electricity Transmission and Distribution Company (ZETDC) and SolGas is strengthening the grid infrastructure. The developments at Cross Mabale culminated in the rehabilitation and upgrade of an 11Kv power line to a new 33Kv power line. The construction of the power plant and the new 33Kv power line has also created employment for locals which dovetails with the Second Republic’s thrust of creating jobs and empowering local communities through the implementation of people centred development programmes and projects that leave no one and no place behind. “This is testimony of the benefits of collaborative efforts in the attainment of remarkable milestones within realistic timeframes. Going forward, I urge SolGas to ensure increased efficiency, performance and safety of the project,’ said President Mnangagwa. “As you increase your investment and expand generation capacity to 15MW and ultimately 50MW, be mindful of the need to preserve the aesthetic and scenic beauty of this area so that your project is in harmony with its surrounding environment.” He said Zimbabwe is harnessing renewable energy in its quest to attain a sustainable energy supply mix as well as entrenching climate change adaptations, resilience and mitigation. “I call upon the individuals and companies alike to play their part in increasing the use of renewable energy. Rooftops, carports, bus sheds and parking lots among other places must be utilised to increase our solar energy infrastructure outlay and ultimately green energy generation use,” said President Mnangagwa. “Equally solar geysers, solar power boreholes and irrigation systems must also be pursued as alternatives to conventional equipment. Let us all play our part in establishing the green economy and saving our mother earth.” — @mashnets