The Chronicle Patrick Chitumba, Midlands Bureau Chief IN pursuit of industrialisation, the Midlands State University (MSU) has established several enterprise units that include chemical manufacturing specialising in the production of detergents and sanitisers. There is also the clothing and textiles unit specialising in the production of quality garments and press and publications which provides requirements for modern information societies. The latest development is the completion of the food and beverages factory shell and production of distilled and bottled water which has started. The bottled water unit is also being prepared to start the production of juices from indigenous fruits such as water berry (hute), Vangueria Infausta (Nzvirimombe/Umviyo) and Wild Plum (Nhunguru/ Umqokolo) and any other seasonal fruits that the country is endowed with. The drinks are now being manufactured at the MSU Industrial hub in Gweru. The industrial hub was launched by President Mnangagwa in 2020. In an interview, MSU director of enterprises Mr Alex Mukwembi, said the university is contributing to the industrialisation agenda. “We have established several enterprise units that include the chemical manufacturing specialising in the production of detergents and sanitisers but the latest development is the completion of the food and beverages factory shell and the production of distilled and bottled water has started. This will see the university getting into partnerships with rural communities in the propagation and mobilisation of the required fruits and thereby providing employment opportunities and providing a market for fruits that ordinarily the community would watch rotting,” he said. Mr Mukwembi said they will be using available resources that will contribute to import substitution. “The projects speak to employment creation and the improvement of social status as espoused in National Development Strategy 1. The project is centered on value addition of fruits, both exotic and indigenous.  That being the case, much attention is on the indigenous fruits which have been neglected. As their characteristic, they have important nutrients thus nutrient availability is enhanced,” he said. All things considered, Mr Mukwembi said the main aim is to try to extract more value from the fruits through product development. He said MSU will soon start manufacturing a wide range of pharmaceutical products, including herbal medicines to supply the local and regional markets. “The goal of the Pharmaceutical Enterprise is to ensure that pharmaceutical product development in the laboratory progresses to commercial production, in line with Education 5.0 which positions universities as the drivers of industrialization,” said Mr Mukwembi. He said the other unit or enterprise is the Press and Publications which he said is a strategic business unit which offers lithographic printing services. “It is located in the Light Industrial Site which is close to the Central Business District of Gweru. The MSU Press and Publications provides the highest quality printing and graphic designs to both domestic and international clients. We offer the following products printed on paper up to A2 size, examination booklets, stationery books (invoice books, receipt books, delivery note books, etc.), business cards, wall calendars, desk calendars, newsletters, brochures and pamphlets, folders, magazines among other services,” said Mr Mukwembi. He said the MSU Enterprises Clothing and Textile Unit is composed of a team of experts with a high level of experience in the fashion industry. The unit, Mr Mukwembi said has an extensive product range that includes sportswear, school wear, academic regalia and personal protective clothing and corporate wear “MSU Enterprises manufactures a wide range of corporate wear. These specially designed clothes consist mostly of suits, dress shirts, formal trousers and skirts or any other uniform that is specified by a corporate customer. Usually, this type of apparel is branded with the corporate customer’s logo. “Our Clothing Unit also manufactures clothing specially designed and fabricated to protect personnel against hazards caused by a dangerous work environment. The products manufactured in this category include work-suits, dustcoats, lab coats, sun hats, scrubs, theatre gowns and many others,” he said. President Mnangagwa has said the establishment of innovation hubs at the country’s state universities has kick-started Zimbabwe’s industrial modernisation agenda through the pursuit of the Education 5.0 policy, which has so far seen the Government registering over 500 patents in various fields.