The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter There could be further delays to the start of the Southern Region Women Soccer League season after it emerged that only five clubs out of a possible 12 have submitted their Covid-19 compliance documents. All the teams have, however, since started training and having friendly matches in preparation for the season start except Highlanders Royals who are yet to assemble a team.  The Highlanders Royals situation flies in the face of the main club executive members who had promised during their campaigns that they will not only concentrate on the men’s first team but their focus will be on all the teams and sport codes under Highlanders Sports Club. Other regions have since started their league matches while the Super League gets underway on April 2, according to the Women Soccer League boss Barbara Chikosi. Southern Region board member fixtures Sibekiwe Ndlovu confirmed that only five teams acceded to the region’s request for information on home ground and vaccination certificates. “We have five teams that are so far compliant namely Street Set, Amakhosikazi, ZRP Bulawayo, Sobukhazi High School as well as Ubuntu. Our league ought to have 12 teams,” said Ndlovu. New Orleans , Biya and Friends, Magwegwe Stars, Byo Queens, Las Pamas, Entumbane Queens and the yet to be assembled Bosso Royals haven’t submitted their documents. “With time not on our side we may have to take off if we get to a reasonable number which, however, has to be determined by a full board so a meeting might have to take place first to determine what that figure could be,” said Ndlovu. Bulawayo used to be the pride of women football in the country, producing stars like Rosemary Mugadza, Nomusa “Boyz” Moyo, Sithethelelwe “Kwinji 15” Sibanda, Precious “Gringo” Mpala, Nokuthula Ndlovu, Ntombiyelanga, Nobuhle Majika, Rudo Neshamba among a glut of stars that illuminated women football in the country and beyond. A combination of squabbles and lack of sponsorship for clubs in the City saw a number of such talented players packing their bags to join security services teams like Black Rhinos, Correctional Queens who also offered them employment.