The Chronicle Yoliswa Dube-Moyo, Mat South Bureau Chief
IT is thanks to efforts by community volunteers like Ms Sifikephi Dube from Bulilima District that Matabeleland South province is experiencing a reduction in HIV prevalence. Her work includes helping raise awareness about HIV prevention, treatment and living with the virus while also offering counselling to people infected and affected by HIV/Aids and related conditions such as tuberculosis. Although Ms Dube and other community volunteers have had to make do with minimal resources, their passion and commitment to the cause keeps them going. “The work can sometimes be exhausting but it gives me great joy to see people living positively with HIV. Some would’ve come from a place of denial; others would’ve been on their death bed but recover as a result of our interventions,” said Ms Dube. She however, said transport challenges have been the biggest setback as the ward she operates in has six villages which need her attention. “The ward I’m working in has six villages and I’ve been having challenges moving around. The National Aids Council recently gave us bicycles and I’m sure I’ll be able to execute my duties with ease in all the villages,” said Ms Dube. The third Sustainable Development Goal (SDG 3) has a target to end the HIV/Aids epidemic by 2030 with experts saying this will be achieved when the number of new HIV infections and Aids-related deaths decline by 90 percent between 2010 and 2030. So far, the rate of drop in Aids-related deaths is on track while the rate of drop in new HIV infections has been affected by the Covid-19 pandemic in addition to other factors. Matabeleland South Nac provincial manager Mr Isaiah Abureni said his organisation has recruited in excess of 600 community volunteers who are pivotal in HIV prevention programmes in the province. “HIV community volunteers refer individuals who require services such as HIV testing and pre-exposure prophylaxis among others to health facilities in the province. They play a critical role as far as HIV/Aids is concerned. They also provide basic HIV prevention commodities such as condoms, lubricants and HIV self-testing kits to the communities in which they live. They also provide basic information to community members on both communicable and non-communicable diseases that are linked to HIV/Aids such as TB and some cancers,” said Mr Abureni. He said the province was experiencing numerous dividends as a result of the work being done by community volunteers. “We’re seeing a reduction in terms of the incidence of HIV in the province. It also points to a reduction in the prevalence in the province although we still host the highest prevalence of HIV in the country. We attribute these positive reductions to some of the work being done by our community volunteers. They’re really doing a good job in our communities,” said Mr Abureni. Chief Masuku said the Covid-19 pandemic should not overshadow HIV/Aids intervention programmes as this would threaten the country’s goal to end Aids by 2030.  “The advent of the Covid-19 pandemic has diverted attention from other diseases we have been fighting as a country. In some spheres, people now have a lax approach towards preventative measures against HIV/Aids. People need to understand that the start of the Covid-19 pandemic did not end the HIV/Aids pandemic. They need to continue to protect themselves and take preventative measures against HIV/Aids,” said Chief Masuku. He said communities need to be reminded that HIV/Aids still exists and efforts to combat the pandemic must continue. “It’s important that people continue protecting themselves against HIV/Aids as they were doing before the outbreak of the Covid-19 pandemic. Let’s not lose sight of how far we’ve come in fighting HIV/Aids,” said Chief Masuku. — @Yolisswa