The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter 
BOSSO 90 coach Melusi ‘Mabaleka’ Sibanda believes his teenage charges are on the right track and will soon surprise seasoned campaigners in the Zifa Southern Region Division One League.  Sibanda’s ‘toddlers’ have a single win from 11 outings, while registering four draws and six losses to remain two points above table anchors Zimbabwe Saints, who have five points. Bosso 90 results have somehow not been well received by a section of the fans, who want nothing, but victory instead of looking at the bigger objective of the project. Unlike in previous seasons, Bosso 90 players are all teenagers, with their ages ranging from 16 to 19 years. “Winning is always good at any given time, that I acknowledge, but look these are mere toddlers with no Division One experience whatsoever. They are still learning the ropes and believe me, one of these days, eyinye izavuka phansi. As coaches, we are looking at the bigger picture more than just winning so supporters need to be calm. These youngsters will bring smiles to their faces, either as Division One players or when they get promoted to the first team,” said Sibanda. On Saturday, Bosso 90 were thumped 0-3 by a Hwange side, which boasts of experienced campaigners, not only in Division One, but also the Premier League. Some fans that watched that game at the Colliery Stadium were nevertheless impressed by the youngsters’ performances despite coming second best against title-chasing Chipangano. “I don’t want to give excuses for losing, but the reality is that this is a completely new team from the one we had three years ago following a change in policy by the club. In the previous setup, we had just a few boys that were 20 and below with the rest over 20 years, but this time around it’s strictly Under-20s who are facing opponents far older than them. Yet besides this age difference, we are so excited about the project and the future is bright,” said Sibanda, who is assisted in the juniors’ set up by Sizabantu Khoza and Danny Ngwenya, while Marko Dube and Smart Moyo are managers. Bosso 90 players’ ages
Prince Ndlovu (16 years), Akim Nkomo (17 years), Nhlanhla Musaliwa (16 years), Zibusiso Mahlangu (17 years), Talent Dube (19 years), Munashe Nduku (18 years), Nigel Mlauzi (19 years), Shelton Gava (18 years), Charlton Nyahanana (18 years), Caesar Dube( 19 years), Gerald Sibanda (19 years), Prosper Msamanyada (19 years), Brian Chitura (19 years), Kwanele Ndlovu (19 years), Marvellous Manzini (18 years), Mncedisi Nyoni (19 years), Bukhosi Xamu ( 18 years), Romeo Zimba (19 years), Curtis Mangurenje (19 years), Ben Bangu(19 years), Lewis Mzondo (19 years), Nigel Ncube (19 years), Simba Madzivire ( 19 years) and Gillian Nyathi(19 years)