The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
APS United coach Lloyd Chitembwe was one of the first people to run onto the Barbourfields Stadium pitch to congratulate Highlanders’ gaffer Mandla Mpofu after his side saw off the challenge of visiting Herentals FC on Sunday. Chitembwe understood that a huge weight had been taken off Mpofu’s shoulders after a 4-0 mauling of Herantals, as Bosso had been struggling for form and goals since the resumption of football activities last year. Sunday’s victory was only Bosso’s second in seven league games and all against lowly sides. If anything, the embrace Chitembwe gave Mpofu is the reason why football is called the beautiful game. Chitembwe, who watched the match from the stands, temporarily disturbed the post-match press conference to congratulate Mpofu, who had been under enormous pressure, as his strikers had been firing blanks since the beginning of the season. In their brief chat, Chitembwe and Mpofu exchanged words of encouragement that are testament that football is not war. Both coaches have been heavily criticised since the resumption of the league and it was pleasing to see them standing shoulder to shoulder with each other.  Chitembwe and Mpofu may have shown great sportsmanship, but in reality, he had not come to Barbourfields Stadium to support the under fire Mpofu, but was on a spying mission, as the two will be seeking to outwit each other at the National Sports Stadium on Sunday. Bosso had struggled to score in open play and their huge win over Herentals should auger well for their confidence for their blockbuster tie against an equally faulty Green Machine. While Caps United have collected 10 points in seven encounters, Bosso have eight. In the 2019 season, Bosso lost 1-2 to Caps United in Harare and then played to a goalless stalemate at Barbourfields Stadium. Encounters between the two teams have always provided good entertainment and Sunday’s clash should be no exception. “If we can grind out a result at Caps United, we will be happy. Every time we play Caps United, it’s always an exciting game,” Mpofu said. Another blockbuster encounter this weekend will see the battle of the platinum miners pitting hosts FC Platinum and Ngezi Platinum Stars in a lunch time kick-off at Mandava Stadium. FC Platinum, who are on a rebuilding exercise, will be looking to return to winning ways after being held to a nil-all draw by Black Rhinos last weekend. Table toppers Manica Diamonds will face Cranborne Bullets at Baobab Stadium, while second-placed Chicken Inn will host Black Rhinos at Luveve Stadium. Fixtures Week 8 Saturday
Chicken Inn vs Black Rhinos, (Luveve Stadium), Yadah vs Bulawayo (Baobab), FC Platinum vs Ngezi Platinum (Mandava Stadium), Dynamos vs ZPC Kariba (National Sports Stadium) Sunday
Caps United vs Highlanders (National Sports Stadium), Tenax vs Herentals (Sakubva Stadium) Bulawayo Chiefs vs Harare City (Luveve Stadium) Triangle United vs Whawha (Gibbo Stadium), Cranbourne Bullets vs Manica Diamonds (Baobab Stadium) -@innocentskizoe