The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
A STRING of poor results that have seen Bulawayo Chiefs picking up two points out of a possible 15, has left the club’s management concerned. The Ninjas, as chiefs are affectionately known, hired Portuguese coach Nilton Terroso in their quest to conquer the domestic league but after a good start that saw them collecting seven points from their opening three matches, the wheels seem to have come off the rails. Since their 2-0 win over FC Platinum when league action resumed this year, Chiefs have gone for five games without a win. They have only managed two draws and three defeats, leaving them in 12th position with nine points. They assembled a bloated technical team led by Terroso, who brought in Iranian Pouria Jarrahi, a physical performance analyser with skills in monitoring players with GPS. The club also have assistant coaches Mark Mathe and Farai Tawachera, goalkeepers’ trainer Nkosi Sibanda and fitness trainer Abraham Mbayiwa in their technical set-up. Former Warriors coach Agent Sawu, who heads their development side, occasionally attends the first team’s sessions. Following last weekend’s 1-2 defeat to Harare City, Chiefs’ secretary Dumisani Mantula-Sibanda said management is worried by the downward spiral of the team. “To say everything is okay and we are not worried will be untrue. We are concerned because the management is doing everything to make sure that the first team is well catered for.  Players and technical staff have everything that they need to compete. The management is cognisant that the team can’t win all games but two points out of 15 points is worrisome. We’re further drifting away from the title chasing pack and if we lose our next game, we will sink into relegation (zone), which is a concern,” said Mantula-Sibanda. He said management is planning to hold a meeting with the technical staff and players to find out what could be affecting the team’s performance. Chiefs’ next game is away to Black Rhinos, who are nursing wounds from their 1-2 loss to log leaders Chicken Inn. Having bolstered their squad with experienced players that include former national team players, defenders Kelvin Moyo, Elvis Moyo and Ian Nekati as well as attackers Obriel Chirinda and Perfect Chikwende, Chiefs had been touted to be among the championship chasing teams. Kelvin Madzongwe, who was part of the Warriors’ squad that participated in the Afcon finals in Cameroon, and veteran forward Obidiah Tarumbwa are also among the players brought in by Terroso. – @ZililoR