The Chronicle Blessing Karubwa, Chronicle Reporter
THE World Bank and Government yesterday signed a US$6,6 million financing agreement for the Zimbabwe Covid-19 Emergency Response Project (ZCERP) that will enhance the capacity of health workers to implement appropriate infection prevention and control measures. The deal was signed in Harare. The project will be implemented by the Catholic Organisation for Relief and Development Aid. The funds will ensure adequate vaccine deployment including outreach, equipment and training of health care workers. It will also support the implementation of a tracking system to monitor and ensure equitable vaccine coverage. “The project will provide essential resources to support the deployment of vaccines that meet the World Bank’s Vaccine Approval Criteria thereby improving health system capacity for a sustained and comprehensive pandemic response in Zimbabwe,” said Ms Mara Warwick, World Bank Country Director for Zimbabwe, Zambia, Tanzania and Malawi.  She said the project will finance activities that increase community level knowledge on vaccination benefits such as strengthening communication and community engagement. It will also enhance the capacity of health workers to implement appropriate infection prevention and control measures. Ms Warwick said the project will support the implementation of a systemic institutional approach that is responsive to client grievances and strengthen sector governance by expanding the implementation of a transparent tracking system for Covid-19 response commodities. “While the Government has already committed at least US$100 million to finance vaccine procurement, we are pleased to sign this agreement as it will enable us to leverage our existing efforts through package of prioritised activities to address operational inefficiencies and inequities in access and uptake of vaccines and other selected Covid-19 response activities,” said Finance and Economic Development Minister Professor Mthuli Ncube. The ZCERP builds on US$7 million in financing that the World Bank mobilised in operational support to Zimbabwe’s health sector in the early stages of the Covid-19 pandemic. — @BlehKarubwa