The Chronicle Sukulwenkosi Dube-Matutu, Chronicle Reporter
THREE illegal gold panners died in two separate mine accidents which occurred in Matabeleland South province. Matabeleland South provincial police spokesperson, Inspector Loveness Mangena confirmed the incidents which occurred on Thursday and Friday at Mpongo Mine and Bina Mine in Gwanda. “I can confirm that we recorded two mine accidents that occurred at Mpongo Mine and Bina Mine in Gwanda. In the first incident, Tennyson Nyoni (42) was panning for gold at a disused mine shaft which is 20 metres deep. While inside, the shaft collapsed trapping him inside. “Nyoni called for help and other panners in vicinity pulled him out. He was ferried to the Gwanda Provincial Hospital where he was pronounced dead on arrival,” she said. Insp Mangena said in the second incident, two panners died after they were struck by rocks while working in a shaft at Bina Mine.  She said the now deceased Brian Ndlovu (32) and Thulani Mhlanga (28) from Spitzkop North in Gwanda were working with two others when the shaft collapsed and rocks crushed them. Insp Mangena said Ndlovu died on the spot while Mhlanga died on admission to Gwanda Provincial Hospital. “I can confirm that we recorded a sudden death case in the Bina Mine area. Ndlovu and Mhlanga were panning for gold with their two counterparts. They went into a shaft while the others remained outside and while they were working, the shaft collapsed. “Their colleagues managed to pull them out of the shaft with the assistance of a passerby. Ndlovu died on the spot while Mhlanga was rushed to hospital where he died on admission,” she said. Insp Mangena urged people to desist from engaging in illegal gold mining activities as they were endangering their lives. She said the province continued to record fatal mine accidents and most of them were as a result of negligence. Insp Mangena said all those wishing to venture into mining activities must go through the necessary procedures. She said a number of people were flocking to disused and condemned mines, which exposed them to danger. “As police, we would like to urge people to desist from engaging in illegal mining activities. Those who wish to engage in mining activities should regularise their operations. People should also stay away from disused and closed mines. We further urge mine owners and managers to ensure that their workers have safety clothing. Equipment also needs to be frequently assessed to ensure that it’s in good condition. It’s imperative that miners operate in a safe environment,” said Insp Mangena. – @DubeMatutu