The Chronicle Vincent Gono, Features Editor
ON Saturday, March 26 Zimbabweans will vote in the by-elections for 26 constituencies and 105 wards to replace MPs and councillors whose seats fell vacant through deaths, recalls and reassignments. Tsholotsho South is one such constituency that fell vacant after the death of Cde Zenzo Sibanda who succumbed to Covid-19. The holding of the by-elections had been put on halt following the outbreak of the Covid-19 pandemic which forced Government to enforce measures such as restricting gatherings to contain its spread.  Chronicle features editor Vincent Gono (VG) spoke to Tsholotsho South Zanu-PF candidate Cde Musa Ncube (MN) who is appealing to the Tsholotsho electorate to give her a chance to represent them. Below are excerpts of the interview: VG: Cde Ncube can you briefly tell us about yourself. Who you are, when were you born and where? MN: My name is Musa Ncube, a daughter of Tsholotsho. I was born in 1971 on 6 January at Mhlabangubo (Mambanjeni), Tsholotsho Ward 13. I am from a family of heroes and nationalists who fought fearlessly against colonialism. My great-grandfather Ntuta was a chief who resisted settlers when they arrived in the country. He was staying around the area which covers some parts of Tsholotsho, Nyamandlovu and uMguza. He fought and resisted the takeover of his ancestral land by the whites but unfortunately they lost the fight and were later displaced and settled koMvundlana area. Through his fights with the whites he lost his chieftaincy. When he passed on his sons took over the fight and fought for a better country. His sons include Makhohliso Ntuta who killed a lion with bare hands and his name is listed among heroes at the Main Post Office Gardens in Byo, Khuphilizwi Zambezi Ntuta who also fought a buffalo, Gwawula, Gwakwaba Ntuta, Sunduza Ntuta. So these grandfathers had their time and passed the baton to their sons who include my uncle Jini Enock Ntuta who inspires me. The nationalist, peacemaker and entrepreneur Cde Ntuta is the man who made me join in politics. His love for development, peace, unity and entrepreneurship inspired me to follow in his footsteps. So to us in the area our parents fought colonisation from the Zapu and Zipra front, we grew up hearing the stories about these organisations and all. Their stand in the revolution made me realise that as a person I have a foundation and my roots are the revolution which uncle Jini pioneered and was a part of. In 1987 the two revolutionary parties Zanu and Zapu came together and we remain united as the revolutionary party  Zanu-PF. I grew up in the structures of the revolutionary party and I have remained there and I will remain representing the community of Tsholotsho. So in brief my DNA is political, having been born in politics, breastfed politics, educated in politics and living politics. My grandfather Khuphilizwi Ntuta also encouraged me to be active in politics. VG: Do you hold any positions in the party structures? MN: Out of my own will I am a mobiliser. I mobilise for the party wherever I am. Whenever there are Zimbabweans I try to make them realise that we need to unite under the banner of the revolutionary  Zanu-PF and work to have a better Zimbabwe. The country needs us all for it to be the Zimbabwe we all want. In terms of the party deployment, I am a Women’s League National Deputy Secretary for Administration working from the Zanu-PF Headquarters. I have held several positions in the party from the district to national level. I have been in the province for 20 years and 10 years in the national executive. I am ready to be deployed anywhere by the party because I am its loyal and patriotic daughter. VG: Why should people vote for you? MN: I think it is not about me but the party. Looking at my age, I am a bridge between the young and the old. I understand the challenges and needs of the old, the young and women. Everyone understands that Tsholotsho is one of the places that has challenges in many areas. As of now I have been pushing to make sure that everyone in Tsholotsho has access to safe drinking water. We are aware that some villages in our district have no drinking water hence this programme of drilling boreholes that I am spearheading with Government assistance. The boreholes are not just providing drinking water but water for irrigation and also watering of livestock. The project of providing water is a huge one as we move towards attaining Vision 2030 as spelt by the President ED Mnangagwa. I have also been empowering the youth, women, widows and the elderly through agricultural projects that include poultry. My intention is that every household in Tsholotsho South should have some form of income-generating project. I identified that agricultural projects are key as they also feed into food security and also address health matters. There are many families that are now running successful poultry projects after I gave them chicks to start the projects. The objective is not to give people handouts but to empower them to start income-generating projects. In terms of education there are some families whose children I am assisting with school fees, especially the orphans and those from poor families that cannot afford the fees. We also assist the sick to get proper medication through various means. In terms of business I assisted and led Tilba (Tsholotsho International Business Association) into being a relevant organisation where small businesses are organised and benefit from various platforms. I believe that small formal and informal businesses must be organised for them to grow. As such I made sure that the organisation — Tilba that our elders created is rejuvenated. I am also advocating for value addition to our timber so that we create employment for our people especially the youths. We need to set up a plant that processes timber and create employment here as opposed to exporting raw timber. There is this project, a challenging one but I want people to give me a chance so that I try to sort it out for them, the Tsholotsho-Nyamandlovu Road. I believe that more needs to be done on it. It needs serious attention and I am availing myself to start working on the road project with the support of the Government and Tsholotsho community. That road is very strategic and when fixed can create a lot of opportunities. The road also links Plumtree, Tsholotsho, Vic Falls, Bulawayo and the rest of the country. VG: We are in the women’s month. What do you think about women in politics as you are one of them? MN: I believe women must be given a chance to lead. What I have already done on the ground and the confidence I am being given by the party, I believe I am the answer to building a better Tsholotsho. Outside being a mother I am doing so well not only in the party but also province. I continue working with widows daily and their challenges are mine, as women we feel for one another and humanity is what we put forward. VG: Why should people vote for Zanu-PF, what has it done in Tsholotsho and in the country? MN: Despite all the challenges we are facing as a district, the Zanu-PF led Government has tried its best. It must be given time to complete what it started. The Government has built hospitals and clinics across the district. The health institutions in the district have been trying their best to cater for the people. Many schools have been built since independence and we have seen many children who are a result of these schools doing well not only locally but internationally. We have professors, journalists, nurses, teachers, doctors and businesspeople who are products of these schools. Zanu-PF has done so well when it comes to agriculture in this district. They have provided water for irrigation hence the many irrigation schemes that have been established. The Government has also been successful in fighting crime in the district. Remember people knew Tsholotsho in a negative way but that has changed because of the strict security policies. In terms of devolution it is trying its best, schools are being refurbished and many other development projects are being implemented using devolution funds. Tsholotsho Centre is being developed into a town and a lot of ground has since been covered. VG: Do you think you can help transform people’s lives through devolution? MN: Remember I was born and bred in Zapu. Its ideology was devolution. I understand devolution just like the President ED who is a former Zipra and Zapu cadre. I am certain that I can make devolution a success in Tsholotsho. I am impressed that the President is pushing for a devolved system of government. That is what we need as societies. Districts are key and it makes everything easier, don’t forget the concept of DCC by Zanu-PF, it is there to make sure that we succeed in that devolution concept. I have already done a lot for our people from a personal level looking at education, agriculture, healthcare and food security. VG: Any other information that you may want people to know about you as a candidate? MN: I want people to know that I am committed to serving them as their servant hence those with problems should not hesitate to engage me. I am appealing to the people of Tsholotsho to give me a chance  to represent and serve them as their MP. I have all that is needed to deliver and all that I want is their support by electing me. The motto of the constituency is improved service delivery and I will do my best to ensure this is achieved. People should unite as we need one another to succeed. Let us support the President in his vision to achieve Vision 2030. As a daughter, sister and mother I am here for your service.