The Chronicle Business Reporter
CLOSE to 100 trade experts from member States in the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (Comesa) have undergone training on trade policy analysis using TradeSift tool. The training, which was virtually conducted by the University of Sussex was aimed at empowering the participants to analyse policy issues and effectively participate in trade negotiations. In a statement, Comesa, a 21-member bloc to which Zimbabwe is part, said the programme was part of a series of initiatives being financed by the European Union (EU) through the Organisation of African, Caribbean and Pacific States (OACPS) and counterpart funding by Comesa through the TradeCom II Capacity Building programme. “The training is also part of the efforts by the organisation to develop a cadre of researchers and experts who are conversant with modern skills being used to resolve different challenges facing regional integration in the region. “These include proliferation of non-tariff barriers and low levels of domestication, compliance and enforcement of agreed trading instruments,” it said.  With TradeSift skills, Comesa said the experts are expected to address poor or lack of appropriate policies and by extension inadequacy in human capacities and capabilities. “As policy makers, researchers and analysts, I urge you to take this training seriously . . . the skills you are about to attain should be put into immediate use by supporting the trade policymaking at national and regional levels,” said Comesa assistant secretary general for programmes Dr Kipyego Cheluget was quoted as saying during opening of the workshop last Monday. He told the participants that Comesa attaches great value on research and evidence-based policy making at both the national and regional levels. In this context, Dr Cheluget said the bloc would continue to facilitate capacity building in all forms as mandated by the Treaty and ensure that the region’s economic integration process is anchored on a strong policy-oriented foundation. Representing the University of Sussex Dr Peter Holmes, urged the delegates to actively participate in the training and gain the much-needed knowledge and skills. TradeCom II capacity building project also supports the Comesa Annual Research Forum presently in its 9th cycle and the virtual master’s degree programme in regional integration presently being offered by the University of Mauritius and Kenyatta University in Kenya.