The Chronicle 1 YOU start your marriage on a foundation of guilt and condemnation. The sin of fornication is forgivable unto God, but the prospect of reaping remains because it is a law. That sin lurks in the shadows, waiting for a time when you get married, and then it pounces on your marriage like a panther. It torments you and attacks your joy through shouting and quarrelling especially in the bedroom. There, you will be reaping. 1. When you expose your nakedness to your boyfriend, you automatically lose value and weight in his eyes. In most cases, girls think that they will be pleasing the boyfriend, but in fact, they will be destroying him. Revealing your nakedness is an introduction to a lack of fear of God. This also applies in the case of boys towards girls. Many women say that, “all men are the same”, the truth is that, men are not the same but how you have allowed them to tamper with your body makes them similar. Again, I say, your nakedness is your gold mine for marriage. Your relationship becomes very light like a feather and he automatically loses the urge to pay bride price for you. A maiden’s integrity is cocooned in the sacredness of her body. There she carries an untainted spirit, an unspoiled heart. Value your body.  2. You destroy TRUST before marriage. When you eventually get married to a man that you will have fornicated with, it becomes difficult to trust each other. Questions will always arise, “if she could sleep with me behind our Pastor’s back, will she not do the same against me?” Trust is the foundation of a marriage, but because of this sin, you will be living in suspicion. The lack of trust that you can see manifesting in a lot of marriages were triggered during the relationship period of that couple. 3. You get married before the actual marriage. This is a huge error for it goes and defies all logic in the kingdom of God. Blood covenants are the strongest and most dangerous covenants in the spiritual realm and on earth. They are a binding, irreversible covenant. Sex is a celebration of a marriage that has taken place. Therefore, when you are having sex before marriage what are you celebrating? Sex was never designed for unmarried people. Sex before marriage is actually a spiritual marriage before the actual marriage. You are getting married before the actual marriage. As a girl, do not be too desperate and obsessed with sex before marriage/ marriage itself. Seek first the kingdom of God. God Bless. Eaglelifeassembly@yahoo.com