The Chronicle Sukulwenkosi Dube-Matutu, Chronicle Reporters
CIVIL servants’ unions have agreed to measures which are being undertaken by Government to improve their conditions of service among them the monthly payment of US$175. Government representatives and the Apex Council on behalf of public service workers’ unions met in the National Joint Negotiation Council on Monday and signed the agreement.  This follows the intervention by President Mnangagwa in the wage impasse after he directed that conditions of service for public sector workers be reviewed with immediate effect. Government has said it remains committed to continue improving conditions of service for teachers and the entire civil service as the economy improves. In a statement, Zimbabwe Confederation of Public Sector Trade Unions (ZCPSTU) president who is also Apex Council president, Mrs Cecilia Alexander said they appreciate Government’s efforts to improve civil servants working conditions. She said they will, however, continue to lobby Government over the welfare of workers. “The National Joint Negotiating Council (NJNC) met on the11th and 28th of February 2022 at Kaguvi Building, Harare and agreed on the following: A 20 percent review on gross emoluments (basic salary, transport allowance, housing allowance, representation allowance where applicable) backdated to 1 January 2022 and to be paid on February 2022 pay date. Continuation of payment of USD 75 Covid-19 allowance for civil servants payable in hard currency with effect from 1 January 2022. Introduction of USD 100 salary to be paid in hard currency across the board with effect from 1 March 2022. This is over and above the ZWL salary as provided for in paragraph 1 above. This brings the total USD monthly pay component to USD 175, with effect from 1 March 2022. Introduction of a housing loan guarantee scheme for home ownership to all civil servants,” she said. “Payment of advancement awards, with immediate effect, backdated to 2012 and subject to computations. Payments will be effected in a staggered manner. Improvement of the administration processes for rebate of duty on motor vehicles imported by civil servants. Payment of school fees for every teaching family for up to three biological children at a maximum of ZWL 20 000 per child per term. Modalities of implementation will be worked out by the relevant authorities.” Mrs Alexander said there will be provision of 34 000 housing units as institutional accommodation for teachers within and outside school premises over a period of five years and provision of a special monthly facility to transport teachers in both rural and urban areas on pay dates. She also said it was also agreed that quarterly negotiations will continue. “With regards to suspended school heads and teachers, the matter has been escalated to the highest office in the land and will be dealt with administratively. In relation to rural transportation for teachers; members are advised that the same facility has now been extended to all civil servants as pronounced by the Public Service Commission Press Statement of 16 February 2022. Members are advised that the above agreement is not a destination, but rather the beginning of a journey towards restoration of a value of wages to pre-October 2018 scale,” she added. Zimbabwe Teachers Association (Zimta) president, Mr Richard Gundani said while they have reached an agreement with Government, the process of negotiating still continues. He said in the meantime teachers should report for duty and deliver as expected. “We appreciate efforts by Government, but the negotiation process continues. By agreeing we are saying that we are pocketing what we are being offered, but we will continue to lobby. In the meantime, workers have to soldier on and deliver as expected,” he said. “We still expect the least paid teacher to receive US$540. As for the others we expect their salaries to be commensurate with their grade. Most of the money which teachers get must be in the form of basic salary and not allowances so that they are guaranteed of a salary which can sustain them upon retirement. We also expect workers to have a medical aid that is adequately funded.” In a statement, Public Service Commission Secretary to Service Commissions, Ambassador Jonathan Wutawunashe said the agreement was a result of further concessions Government has made to improve the welfare of its workers. He said Government remains committed to improving the conditions of service for all public servants and will do everything in its power to respond to their concerns in a spirit of mutual engagement, goodwill and realism. Ambassador Wutawunashe said the Public Service Commission was grateful to all civil servants who have continued to diligently perform their duties during the processes of negotiation and engagement.