The Chronicle Prosper Ndlovu in Victoria Falls Church leaders have urged Zimbabweans to take heed of President Mnangagwa’s call for peace and unity during and after today’s by-elections. Throughout the campaign period for the by-elections to elect both Members of Parliament and councillors, President Mnangagwa has been preaching the gospel of peace and unity among Zimbabweans. “As churches we are 100 percent behind the President’s call for peace and tranquillity during and after the by-elections,” said Reverend Andrew Wutaunashe, chairman of the Zimbabwe Indigenous Inter-Denominational Council of Churches (ZIICC). Rev Wutaunashe said Zimbabweans should strive to ensure that the prevailing peaceful environment is maintained even after the by-elections. ZIICC patron, Bishop Nehemiah Mutendi, said as church leaders they were excited to briefly meet President Mnangagwa who presided over the 3rd International Renewable Energy Conference and Expo at a local hotel yesterday while they held their church leadership workshop in a separate conference room at the same hotel. “We are excited to have you (President) here. The State has a duty to look after the welfare of its people and you have been preaching against violence. We as churches have the duty to look after the needs of the soul and we also call for peace during the polls,” said Bishop Mutendi. Despite his busy schedule, President Mnangagwa accepted to briefly engage with the religious workshop delegates, who burst into song and ululation as he entered their venue. He commended the indigenous church leaders for being patriotic and supporting the Government in tackling different societal ills and promoting development. “The established churches are all recognised by our Constitution, but you are different from churches that get their instructions from elsewhere,” said the President.  He said Government was doing its best to inculcate values of peace, love and unity and this should be complemented by churches given their religious influence. “We have the forthcoming elections and me and my party are preaching peace, love and unity and we need you to complement that at your different churches. We in Government would love to see all churches teaching all our people about the values of peace and unity,” said President Mnangagwa. He said when the nation embraces values of peace and unity, it will be easy to foster development. “We will not have criminals vandalising infrastructure, stealing electricity cables, stealing public funds or engaging in other criminal activities that retard development,’ said President Mnangagwa. The President later toured exhibition stands by women from different churches, who exhibited different products they manufacture in their respective districts.