The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
WHEN her husband died more than two decades ago, she had no job or source of income to help her take care of her children but embracing the Government’s land form programme helped her put food on the table. Mrs Jester Moyo-Dube (62), who benefitted from the Command Livestock programme in Masue resettlement area outside Victoria Falls, believes lady luck always smiles at her. She received three heifers in 2018 and the herd has grown to eight after two of them calved twice and the other once. Mrs Moyo-Dube said she almost gave up on life after the death of her husband, as she had to take care of their three children who were still minors and needed to go to school among other needs. However, the turning point came in 2001 when she benefitted from the land reform programme and was allocated a piece of land in Baobab, Masue, where she grows crops and keeps cattle. Her husband was a war veteran. Fast forward to 2018, Mrs Moyo-Dube was one of only four people from Masue resettlement area in Hwange district who benefitted from the Command Livestock programme. “I did not expect to benefit from this but I think I was lucky to be selected. It started with me getting land in 2001 and to know that the piece of land was registered in my name gives me pride as a woman,” said Mrs Moyo-Dube. She said when her husband died, she had no job or source of income to help her take care of the children and she would struggle to put food on the table. “We were living in BH 25 when my husband died and I had no means of taking care of the children. That is when I got the land and luckily in 2018, I got three head of cattle and two of them have calved twice while the other one has one. “I was also one of the only four people that benefitted from the cattle facility in our resettlement area and so these cattle have added to the small herd that I had. “I know that we will never starve because we have span to till our land and can sell a beast in times of drought,” she said. Mrs Moyo-Dube said it has not been easy to take care of the cattle in the past four years and thanks Government for various programmes including veterinary services.  President Mnangagwa launched the $10 million Command Livestock facility to cater for Matabeleland region in 2018 with farmers in Matabeleland South being given 1 660 cattle and 1 444 being distributed in Matabeleland North. This is part of the Command Livestock, Fisheries and Wildlife Programme initiated by the Second Republic.
Mrs Moyo-Dube also does crops and this year planted maize, sorghum and millet among others. After the launch, Mrs Moyo-Dube was accompanied by her last born daughter Fortune to collect the three beasts from Jotsholo in 2018 to their place. “We were told by an Agritex officer about the programme and I went to register alongside many other villagers. I did not even think I would be considered. “I couldn’t believe that it was only four of us who benefitted. We were told that after five years they will come and collect the mother while we will remain with the off-springs. “Already two have given birth twice while the other has calved once. I almost failed to move them from Jotsholo because it cost  US$300 to transport them but we managed eventually. “This programme has benefitted me and my family because we now have reliable draught power and food,” she added. She said her nightmare has been protecting her livestock from predators and diseases.
Communities that are adjacent to game parks especially in Lupane, Hwange and Tsholotsho are exposed to human-wildlife as predators prey on livestock and crops and farmers guard their livestock throughout the year. “I want to thank the Government for this programme. We are also able to dip our cattle every week because we have a dip tank and chemicals. “As a result, none of the cattle I got through Command Livestock died. I am very grateful because there are many people who did not benefit hence, I will continue keeping them safely,” she added. Fortune hopes to also benefit from other Government programmes. — @ncubeleon