The Chronicle Hatred Zenenga & Prosper Ndlovu In Dubai, UAE
ZIMBABWEANS in the diaspora have vowed to take up business opportunities at home and playing their part to enhance economic transformation in line with President Mnangagwa’s vision of creating an upper middle-income economy by 2030. Through remittances being sent to families back home every month, the diaspora community managed to pump in a record US$1,4 billion into the economy in 2021, according to Treasury figures, becoming the country’s largest source of foreign currency. Contributing during the Zimbabwe Diaspora Engagement Forum that was attended by President Mnangagwa and Cabinet here yesterday, members of the diaspora community, who turned up in their large numbers, expressed readiness to invest in various sectors of the economy. They singled out agriculture, real estate, tourism, education and health as top opportunity windows, which could benefit more from skills acquired through their exposure to developed economies. Chairman of the Zimbabwe Diaspora Community in the UAE, Mr Clemence Mangwana, said their members were keen on accessing land for various business projects such as farming and construction. “When the embassy was established here (2021) they shared their vision with us and we also shared our vision with them, and the vision was ‘land for all Zimbabweans by 2030’,” he said. “We have sent our submissions for  feedback and Government should respond in what ways it can assist Zimbabweans in the diaspora to get land for farming and residential stands. “We are encouraging Zimbabweans to invest back home, develop our country and to remain united as one nation, to engage stakeholders and all those people who have the potential to invest back home.” Mr Rungano Innocent Nyaude, who chairs the newly formed Zimbabwe Business  Council in the UAE, said a survey they conducted as an organisation revealed that a majority of Zimbabweans in the UAE were keen to support the country’s development blueprint.  “The National Development Strategy (NDS1:2021-2025) outlines the nation’s vision of a prosperous and upper middle-income society by 2030. “Central to the success of this NDS1 is the need to focus on smart investments that ensure timely delivery of programmes and projects. “The contribution of the diaspora to the NDS1 will also be critical. Investment questions and land issues dominate the topics of interest among the Diasporans.” The diaspora community said it was working closely with the country’s ambassador to the UAE, Lovemore Mazemo, to ensure effective engagement with the Government with  the view of enhancing supportive policy formulation. During the plenary session different participants also expressed desire to support the economy beyond just sending remittances. Dr Allan Nhapi, a medical doctor based in Australia said he has a ready network of investors to establish a chronic diseases hospital preferably in Victoria Falls or at the Robert Mugabe International Airport. He appealed to the Government for assistance in getting the land and immediately received a guarantee and support from President Mnangagwa. Dr Abigail Magwenzi, a former University of Zimbabwe lecturer now based in the UAE, said her presence in the Arab country has exposed her to modern economic models and links to global funders who could contribute to transforming Zimbabwe, especially in the area of women empowerment, which is critical under Vision 2030. Mr Masimba Chikukwa, who is also into business said he was eager to work with the Ministry of Youth, Sport, Art and Recreation to facilitate sponsorship towards school   sporting activities and provision of various sporting kits. Ms Hanah Mutsemo, who said she was involved in nursery business partnership, said she has gained a lot of exposure during the last six years in the UAE and suggested that Government sets up a system in which diasporans can contribute at least US$50 each time they come home and that this fund be ring-fenced for development. The diasporans took turns to ask ministers and other senior Government officials questions as they sought clarity on processes and requirements for investing back home.