The Chronicle Sukulwenkosi Dube-Matutu, Chronicle Reporter
POLICE have arrested over 1,5 million people nationwide for violating Covid-19 regulations since the start of the lockdown in March 2020.  President Mnangagwa announced the first lockdown in March 2020 which was three-weeks long following an outbreak of Covid-19. The lockdown has been extended at intervals in the intervening years. Some people have however been violating the Covid-19 regulations. In an interview, National police spokesperson, Assistant Commissioner Paul Nyathi said as of Sunday over 1,5 million arrests had been recorded for violation of Covid-19 regulations since March 30 in 2020. He said most of the arrests were for failure to wear masks. “As of 27 February we had made 1 551 902 arrests for violation of Covid-19 regulations. Most of these arrests were for failure to wear a mask in public places. A lot of people have shown complacency as they continue to walk around with masks dropped down to their chins while others walk around without wearing masks,” he said. “Other arrests were for failure to maintain social distancing and violating the curfew among other offences. Some people are hosting parties and holding church gatherings beyond the curfew period. On 27 February only we recorded 1 742 arrests.” He urged members of the public to adhere to guidelines set by the Ministry of Health and Child Care as they were meant to protect lives. Asst Comm Nyathi also urged people to take the Covid-19 issue with the seriousness that it deserves. He said police will continue to enforce the regulations. “We would like to remind the public that it’s in their interest that they adhere to Covid-19 regulations so that they don’t put their lives in danger. People shouldn’t cry foul when they are arrested as we will continue to enforce regulations,” Asst Comm Nyathi said. Meanwhile, Asst Comm Nyathi said 115 790 arrests have been made under operation No to Cross Border Crimes/ Fhasi Ngamilandu Yamukanoni Yamashango/ Mhosva Pamiganhu Ngadzipere/ Amacala Kawaphele Emingceleni Yelizwe which started in January last year while 9 694 people have been arrested under operation Chikorokoza Ngachipere/ Isitsheketsha Kasiphele/ No to Machete Gangs since the start of the year. 