The Chronicle Sukulwenkosi Dube-Matutu, Chronicle Reporter THE prolonged dry spell experienced across the country in recent weeks has affected pastures, leaving farmers in Matabeleland South in fear of losing their animals. The dry spell has also damaged crops, crushing hopes of recording a good harvest. However, some light showers were experienced in some areas yesterday and last night looked promising. Despite projections of normal to above normal rainfall over the 2021/2022 cropping season, the dry spell has persisted causing moisture stress on crops. The same applies to some pastures which have permanently wilted. Matabeleland South Province is a cattle region, hence many farmers rear livestock for a source of livelihood. Crops generally do not perform well in the province under rain-fed agriculture as the area receives low rains. Farmers said they have watched in despair as the recently good pastures have wilted. Mr Bernard Nkala who is an A2 farmer from Mkashi area in Gwanda said low rains did not only affect their crops but their livestock as well. “We fear that we will suffer a double loss this year as we will lose most our crops and also our animals. We were hopeful that we will have good pastures like we did last year but it seems this time around it’s not the case. The dry spell has persisted for long and the pastures are now wilting which means our animals will run out of food soon. We started receiving rains in December and by February they were gone. Even if the rains come some of the pastures won’t be revived,” he said.  Mr Nkala said the low rains will also affect supply of water for animals. Mr Phumulani Moyo from Garanyemba Village said it will be costly for farmers to buy stockfeed. He said while they could have a supplement for pastures through stockfeed, they could not substitute water. He said there was a need for big dams which could sustain farmers even during dry seasons. Mr Moyo said dams in his area were silted and couldn’t hold much water. “We are going to have a serious problem this year as we might lose our livestock. We are running out of pastures because of the prolonged dry spell and we will also run out of water for our livestock soon. “The situation could be better if we had big dams that could hold the little water that we get. We can substitute pastures with stockfeed but not water,” he said. Mr Moyo added: “At this rate our animals will soon have to walk long distances in search for water and pastures. It’s not good for animals to walk long distances to feed as this affects their health.” Matabeleland South provincial livestock specialist Mr Hatitye Zondai said significant inflows had been received in dams in the province but they could hold water for two or three months. He said there was need for more dams in the province. Mr Zondai said livestock in the province was in good condition but pastures were fast depleting due to the prolonged dry spell. “If farmers see that the situation is worsening, they will have to supplement their animals with stockfeed in order to preserve their herds,” he said. — @DubeMatutu