The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
WHAT started off as part of efforts to lose weight and be more active has seen young Stingrays Swimming Academy swimmer, Sibusiso Fayayo (12) dominate his peers in the pool and is now a top swimmer in the country. During national swimming championships held at Les Brown Pool in Harare last month, Fayayo dominated his age group, taking pole position in the boys 12 and under category. Fayayo, swimming for the Bulawayo Amateur Swimming Association (BASA), clinched three gold, eight silver and two bronze medals in individual events to emerge best overall. The Masiyephambili Primary School pupil won gold medals in 200m breaststroke, mixed 12 and Under 200m medley relay, 100m butterfly, 100m breaststroke, took silver in 50m butterfly, 200m freestyle relay, 200m individual medley, 50m breaststroke, 200m backstroke, 400m freestyle relay, 200m freestyle, 400m freestyle and 50m butterfly while clinching bronze in 400m medley relay, 100m freestyle and 400m freestyle relay. The medal haul saw him clinch the best age overall swimmer after bagging 92 points. His father, Rodrick Fayayo said while he was overjoyed with his performance, the tournament was one of Sibusiso’s most difficult one as he faced stiff challenge from other swimmers in Harare such as Ethan Donzwa who pipped him in his favourite events, the 200m and 400m freestyle. “I would say the recent win was the most difficult in his career. He is used to winning but this time there was stiff competition. He lost some races which he thought he would easily win. The 400m and 200m freestyle are his favourite races that he normally wins but he lost them to Donzwa,” said Fayayo. He said his son had to dig deeper in order to clinch the age overall winner, which was decided on the last day.
Donzwa was second in the overall age group standings with 90 points. Fayayo, who holds the 100m freestyle record for Bulawayo province and the 100m butterfly record nationally, broke into the provincial team at the age of eight; a year after he started swimming and has never looked back, dominating his peers both in the province and nationally. His forays into the pool began when his parents wanted him to lose weight and a family friend suggested they take him for swimming lessons. “Three months into his swimming, Nokuthula Cyprianos of Stingrays noticed him and invited him to join their club. “At that time he was seven years old and the following year he made it into the Matabeleland juniors team that competed in Harare. He was the youngest together with his friend Kwandokuhle Nkomazana. “He used those nationals to gain experience and from there he has not looked back,” said an elated Fayayo. Sibusiso, who was chosen to lead the BASA juniors at the National Juniors Short Course Championships scheduled for this weekend, said he was excited about being handed the captaincy.  “I was happy to win the overall age category at the national senior championships and I am hoping to do well again at the juniors scheduled for this weekend,” he said. Sbu, who also plays cricket, will be heading to South Africa next week for the SA National juniors that run from March 16 to 21. Cyprianos said Sbu’s enthusiasm and dedication has been the driving force behind his success. She said he showed zeal from the first day he joined Stingrays and has remained eager to do his best. “Sbu showed enthusiasm from day one and he is dedicated to the sport, never missing any training sessions. His parents are also committed so that also helps a lot. “He also looks up to older swimmers, with Denilson being one of his idols and that assists him to push harder as he wants to do even better. He is focused, knows how to compete positively in the pool and the future looks bright if he keeps like this,” she said. Masiyephambili School sports director, Vezubuhle Ntuliki said it was the highest sporting excellence achieved by a student. “We are happy and excited by his work ethic and performances. We believe this will spur other juniors as he has raised the school’s flag very high,” he said. -@innocentskizoe