The Chronicle Leonard Ncube in Victoria Falls
VICTORIA Falls-based Zifa Southern Region Division One side Mosi Rovers have entered into a two-year partnership with Genesis Sporting who will be supplying the team with kits. A fine run by the Mehluli Moyo-coached side in the first six games of the season attracted
Genesis Sporting, a Zimbabwean kit manufacturer and broker which has since given the team home and away kits and training bibs. The deal involves Mosi Rovers selling replica jerseys and the first batch has since been delivered with the second on its way. The club will retain 20 percent from the sales. Club chairman Martin Mhlanga said the partnership may not have come at a better time than now. “This partnership comes at a time when as Mosi Rovers we are trying to strike synergies having been crippled by Covid-19. Genesis has come at a time when we really need such assistance. We now have three kits and replicas,” he said. Genesis Sporting director for marketing Zorodzai Damiso said the partnership seeks to professionalise Mosi Rovers. “We are identifying community driven teams which have a sizeable following and we will be responsible for kitting them while they help us sell replica jerseys. We gave them home and away kits as well as training and warm up bibs and kits for the technical team for match day and travelling.  “This is a two-year deal where they will sell replica jerseys and retain 20 percent of the sales. When they meet target they will get tracksuits, travelling bags and sleep ons while each player gets a squad number assigned to him. We are trying to professionalise the team and help them commercialise,” said Damiso. Genesis Sporting has similar partnerships with Dulibadzimu FC in Central Region and Trojan in
Northern Region while a deal is being negotiated with a premiership club. Mosi Rovers has been conducting fundraising activities such as musical shows, raffle draws and sponsored walks to keep the club financially afloat in the absence of sponsors. A fine run by the team has also reignited excitement among fans and business community who are now turning up in huge crowds to watch the team’s home matches. Mosi’s first loss of the season was last weekend’s 0-3 drubbing by Hwange FC which coach
Moyo attributed to lack of experience by his boys. He said his charges had gone back to the drawing board ahead of today’s home match against
Makhandeni Pirates at Chinotimba Stadium. “We conceded three goals in the first 35 minutes and when we changed tactics, we managed to contain them. We even played with 10 men in the second-half since we had exhausted our substitutes due to injury but they could not penetrate,” he said.
-@ncubeleon