The Chronicle Sukulwenkosi Dube-Matutu, Chronicle Reporter
TRADITIONAL leaders have raised concern over rising cases of violence being perpetrated by teenagers, involving dangerous weapons. On Sunday a 15-year-old teenager from Mangwe District allegedly fatally stabbed her peer after accusing her of dating her boyfriend. Police confirmed the incident which occurred at around 2AM. The suspect and the victim were attending a party in Madabe area when they had an altercation. The suspect who has since been arrested accused the now deceased of dating her boyfriend. She withdrew a knife from her jacket and stabbed her rival above the collar bone. Recently, a 13-year-old teenager from Umguza District allegedly fatally stabbed her friend before she tried to hang herself in a dispute over a boy. The teenager confronted the now deceased while she was at her home. She stabbed the friend after accusing her of dating her sister’s boyfriend. In another incident, a 17-year-old Filabusi teenager fatally struck a 37-year-old man with an axe and brick on the head during a misunderstanding. Chief Bango said it was concerning that juveniles, especially girls, were handling dangerous weapons such as knives. “Crime isn’t a usual thing but what is now concerning is that there are now more and more juvenile offenders in these cases.  These are not just minor offences, but they are serious offences such as murder which involve dangerous weapons. We used to know that jail is for elderly people but now youngsters are slowly being oriented into crime. We see them being perpetrators in a number of rape cases,” he said. Chief Bango added: “To make matters worse, we now have teenage girls being offenders and the cause will be disputes over boys. This is a sign that moral values are fast being eroded as generations go by.” Headman Manguba in Bulilima District said there was a need for parents to instil moral values among teenagers. He said unfortunately some youngsters were staying with little supervision as their parents were working in the diaspora. Headman Manguba said it is necessary for guardians or communities to assume responsibility over such children. He said some elderly people were to blame as they were orienting youngsters into criminal activities. “Sometimes elderly people are to blame because instead of reprimanding the youngsters they will in fact be leading them astray. For example, in this Mangwe incident this 15-year-old wasn’t supposed to be at a party in the early hours of the morning. Juveniles now drink under the watchful eye of elderly people which then leads them into crime,” he said. Chief Madlambuzi from Bulilima District said youngsters needed guidance and they could only get it from elderly people in the community.  — @DubeMatutu