The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
FOOTBALL pundit and avid Southern Region Division One follower Praise “Dumi” Dlakama has said it is too early to declare the league campaign a two-horse race between Hwange and Arenel arguing there are other teams showing promise. Hwange dropped points when they were held to a goalless draw by Ratanang at Luveve Stadium’s B-arena on Saturday, which allowed second placed Arenel to close the gap. Hwange are still on top with 21 points while second placed Arenel, who hammered ZPC Hwange 3-1 moved to 19 points. The two teams are also set to clash in the Wafa Wafa knockout Cup competition. Judging from action in the cup competition and the nine league games that have been played in the league, the two teams appear to have assembled strong sides and it is no surprise they have been exchanging top spot on the table over the last weeks. “It’s still early days to declare the race a two horse race,” Dhlakama said.  “Obviously the Colliery is a fortress and they have experience in their books with the likes of Canaan Nkomo and Felix Chindungwe who have experience in getting teams promoted. Hwange are the favourites but Arenel are in there with a shout. Kudzayi Mhandire has assembled a strong squad with a mixture of experience and youth. They have depth which is a great advantage for them,” he added. He went on to say the likes of Mosi Rovers and Indlovu Iyanyathela must not be taken lightly. “We cannot rule out the likes of Mosi Rovers who have also been playing well. Indlovu Iyanyathela are the team in form in recent games, they are really going to cause a number of upsets. They have also indicated their intent to win the league. Ratanang are playing well but their objective is staying in the league rather than going for the title,” he said. Meanwhile, Zifa Southern Region is expected to reveal the dates of the Wafa Wafa knockout competition The final was initially meant to be played before the Division One league programme started, but was pushed back to complete other logistics. -@innocentskizoe Results Indonsakusa 2-2 Bosso90, Arenel 3-1 ZPC Hwange, CIWU 0-2 Talen Vision, Ratanang 0-0 Hwange, Mosi Rovers 3-2 Makhandeni Pirates, Casmyn 3-0 Quality Foods, Mainline 2-3 Indlovu Iyanyathela, Zimbabwe Saints 0-3 Ajax Hotspurs, Mountain Climbers 2-1 Binga Pirates