The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
WITH seven goals to his name from eight Castle Lager Premier Soccer League matches, 25-year-old Chicken Inn FC forward Brian Muza has set himself a target of 16 goals for the 2021/22 season in the hope of attracting foreign interest. Muza is having a dream PSL debut season and scored a brace at the weekend in the Gamecocks’ 2-1 win over Black Rhinos, a result that saw them clinging onto the top of the league table.  The pint-sized striker joined Chicken Inn from Zifa Southern Region Division One side Talen Vision at the beginning of 2020 and gives credit to his teammates, coaches and management for helping him settle in. “Barring injuries, my personal target is to score 16 goals and help the team win the championship. It’s still early days, but as a player I would like to have a championship medal and it will be special if I win it with Chicken Inn in my debut season. I’m enjoying my game, getting great support from my coaches, management and teammates, which makes it easy for me to focus on scoring goals,” said Muza. The Gamecocks top the table with 19 points, two ahead of Manica Diamonds after eight rounds of matches.
Muza has scored more than half of Chicken Inn’s 12 goals in the league. The slippery forward, who has been given the role of a false number nine, who drops into the midfield before bursting into attack, said he is in the Premiership to show that there is talent in lower divisions that can illuminate the topflight. “I’m grateful to coach Joey Antipas, who followed me while in Division One and got me to come here. You know, there are a few coaches who believe they can get good players from Division One, but guess what, there are a lot of talented guys in Division One who are yearning to play in the PSL. I’m lucky that the coach has told me to enjoy my game and with every outing, I’m learning and improving. It is words like ‘go out, enjoy your game and get goals’ coming from coach (Antipas) that make me work harder, as I don’t want to disappoint him for having faith in me,” said Muza. Antipas, who has a knack for giving unheralded players an opportunity to shine, described Muza as a fighter. “Muza’s performances have been top notch. He is a fighter and is one player that when you give a half chance he’ll punish you. Muza has made a big impact in the team, scoring important goals for us, but not forgetting his teammates who’ve come up with assists. If he keeps his head on the ground, concentrates on his game, he’ll be a revelation,” said Antipas, who started following the player in 2017 when he was turning out for Casmyn, another Zifa Southern Region Division One side. Antipas also gave credit to Chicken Inn physical trainer Presley Mabhena for helping Muza with his fitness. “In his first games, Muza would easily burn out, but Presley has done a great job in conditioning him so that he gets into his best shape,” said Antipas. – @ZililoR