The Chronicle Yoliswa Dube-Moyo, Matabeleland South Bureau Chief
LOCAL Government and Public Works Minister July Moyo has said the Gwanda and Beitbridge municipalities must run their own water systems in order to solve the water supply challenges in the towns.  Gwanda residents had moved to petition President Mnangagwa over a stand-off between the Zimbabwe National Water Authority (Zinwa) and the Gwanda Municipality which has affected water supply in the mining town. Zinwa was directed by the Government about six months ago to hand over the water treatment plant to the Gwanda Municipality but it was reportedly still holding onto the plant due to unpaid bills. The local authority owes Zinwa  more than $270 million and will be required to pay $18 million per month to clear their debt. Minister Moyo said following various consultations, it had been agreed that the municipalities run their own water management systems. “I had been approached by the Matabeleland South Provincial Affairs and Devolution Minister Abednico Ncube and was also alerted by the MP for Beitbridge East Cde Albert Ngulube about the situation that was prevailing in Beitbridge and in Gwanda. I was visited by councillors from Gwanda and my response was we must meet in order to solve this matter. Before my colleague, the Minister of Lands and Agriculture, Water, Fisheries and Rural Development Dr Anxious Masuka left for Senegal, we had a meeting in Bulawayo together with his chief director and the chief executive officer of Zinwa. We discussed what solutions we could proffer for this situation. We engaged councillors and management from Beitbridge and Gwanda regarding the way forward. Gwanda gave us the details of the problems they were facing and in a lot of cases they were saying similar things as those happening in Beitbridge,” said Minister Moyo. He said they concluded that the solution to the problem is to allow the two municipalities to manage their water supply systems as opposed to Zinwa doing it. “The two local authorities are now municipalities and should therefore be able to manage their water supply systems. Zinwa or the Ministry of Water will however continue to give them technical assistance. Our devolution agenda requires that those ministries that devolved their duties to local authorities must follow up and work with local authorities. We must also ensure that Zinwa gives technical support even if it means local authorities paying for that technical support so that we run our water systems efficiently taking advantage of the expertise we have in the Ministry of Water as well as Zinwa,” said Minister Moyo. Zinwa Corporate Communications and Marketing Manager Mrs Marjorie Munyonga said they were in the process of implementing the Government directive. “In August last year, the Government through the Minister of Lands, Agriculture, Fisheries and Rural Development directed that Zinwa and Gwanda Municipality work on the handover of the water treatment plant to the latter. In compliance with the direction, Zinwa and the Gwanda Municipality commenced engagements towards the handover. Deliberations of these engagements are confidential as per the understanding between the two parties,” said Mrs Munyonga. She said the Gwanda Municipality owes Zinwa $270,5 million as at February 28, 2022. “To curb the further growth of this debt and for Zinwa to raise resources needed for the sustainable water supplies in the town while parties work on the handover, Zinwa has reactivated the bulk prepaid water meters for the municipality.” Mrs Munyonga added that the meters allow Gwanda to pay for its water requirements in advance while also servicing the debt. The Municipality of Gwanda is owed more than $330 million by residents and corporates, a situation which has compromised service delivery. In April last year, the municipality was forced to disconnect water supplies to defaulting ratepayers to force them to clear their debts. Gwanda Mayor Councillor Njabulo Siziba said the council would continue engaging residents so that they understand the importance of paying their bills. — @Yolisswa