The Chronicle Oliver Kazunga, Senior Business Reporter
FIRST Mutual Life has been conferred with another ISO9001:2015 certification for the third consecutive time as the firm has in recent  years endeavoured to attain high service excellence. In a statement, First Mutual Life said its sister company, First Mutual Health has also gone through the certification process and is now ISO certified. “First Mutual Life was recently conferred the ISO9001:2015 certificate which is renewed every three years having initially attained ISO certification in 2012 and has over the years, endeavoured to attain high service excellence and even surpass it. “From the First Mutual group of interest to note is that First Mutual Health has also gone through the certification process and is now ISO certified,” it said. First Mutual Life said life insurance or health insurance are sensitive ventures in which integrity and professionalism are key to the success of the business. At a recent symbolic certificate handover ceremony, First Mutual Life managing director Mr Williefaston Chibaya was quoted highlighting that the ISO 9001 certification process provides an enhanced customer service experience. This, he said, is by not only identifying key priorities for its customers, but also outlining processes to further optimise these priorities based on customer expectations and needs. He noted that service with enhanced quality translates into reduced customer complaints and more satisfied consumers, and ultimately increased revenue. “As a business we can detect and identify problems in good time, which means that we can quickly take steps to avoid the same mistakes in the future. “Basically what we are saying is that an ISO 9001 certification provides objective proof to our staff, our partners, our clients and the outside world that customer satisfaction is at the core of our business,” said Mr Chibaya.  Standards Association of Zimbabwe (SAZ) director Dr Eve Gadzikwa was quoted emphasising that the standard that businesses are being  certified to, the Quality Management System 9001:2015 helps build consumer confidence through third party independent attestation by the local standards board, to the high level of quality and excellence. “It is the most readily recognised management standard in the world. “This means that certification to the SAZ QMS assures conformity to globally accepted best practice in Quality Management Systems. “The certificate awarded to First Mutual Life and First Mutual Health by SAZ is internationally recognised due to the fact that the SAZ is not only a member of ISO and ARSO but most importantly, the SAZ ZWS ISO 9001:2015 certification scheme is accredited by the South African National Accreditation System (SANAS) and SANAS is a signatory  to the International Accreditation Forum (IAF) Mutual Recognition Agreement,” she said. Dr Gadzikwa said the recertification testifies to the effect that First Mutual Life and First Mutual Health are a good corporate citizen committed to contributing to a better tomorrow for individuals, corporates and the country at large. “The certificate that is being re-awarded to First Mutual Life and First Mutual Health today has a three-year validity period and should be proud that it satisfied the rigorous checks and balances which form part of the SAZ’s assessment for certification. “During this time, as you are aware the SAZ is committed to continually; monitoring the company’s performance against the requirements of the Quality Management System standard through periodic surveillance visits. “It is therefore paramount that the company continues to adhere to the principles of its certification by maintaining and improving their quality management system. “If you fail to maintain and improve your quality management system, SAZ will not hesitate to withdraw the certificate.” she said. First Mutual Life and First Mutual Health have pledged to continue upholding surpassing the standards demanded by ISO until the next review. — @KazungaOliver