The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
VICTORIA Falls residents have appealed to Government to allocate more Zupco buses to the resort city after commuter operators hiked fares for the second time in two weeks to US$1 per trip. Early this month a trip was $100 before transporters increased to $120.  A few days ago, the fare was hiked to US$1 per trip, a fare which commuters say is too high considering that the distance from the city centre to the furthest point in Mkhosana is about 5km. There are no kombis in Victoria Falls and transport operators use smaller metered taxis as pirate taxis.
The fare hike is in response to the increase in fuel prices. Since Friday, many commuters have been walking to town and back saying they cannot afford the new fares. Taxi drivers who spoke to Chronicle said demand for taxis had gone down drastically following the fare hike. They however justifed increasing the fares saying it was in response to the sharp increase in fuel prices. Transport operators take advantage of the presence of wildlife which leaves some residents with no option but to board public transport. A majority however now walk to work or for shopping in town while those employed in the tourism industry rely on company buses. One resident Ms Moreblessing Khumalo said school children are the worst affected. “Fuel prices went up but not as high as what the taxis have done. Many people now walk to town because this is too much and Government should intervene especially by availing more Zupco buses to Victoria Falls. School children are the worst affected and if the situation continues like this some will fail to go to school especially those attending schools outside the city. Zupco should reintroduce the routes and timetables it used to have when it was introduced,” she said. Another resident, Mr Cletus Mashoko said Victoria Falls needs at least two dedicated buses. There are Zupco buses that ply rural routes and occasionally service the city commuters. “Government should allocate more buses to Victoria Falls. There should be at least two buses in town and two more for the rural areas,” he said. Some people said they would rather stay home than pay US$1 for a trip to town unless there are very serious reasons to be in town. When Zupco buses were introduced in Victoria Falls two years ago, residents shunned the buses preferring to board metered taxis. The effects of Covid-19 have left residents with no disposable income following the demise of the tourism industry and many now want the Zupco buses. Victoria Falls Combined Residents Association chairman Mr Kelvin Moyo said the issue of public transport should be addressed urgently. “Transport is an essential service and it is worrying to see many people walking to town. Victoria Falls is still suffering from effects of Covid-19 and for transporters to charge US$1 is not fair because that is a lot of money. There are some areas that are dangerous for one to walk early in the morning or evening because of presence of wild animals,” he said. -@ncubeleon