The Chronicle Yvonne Ncube, Showbiz Reporter
VEZA: THE UNFOLDING, a Bulawayo-produced action thriller has raised the country’s flag high after being nominated for Best Movie in Southern Africa at the African Magic Viewer’s Choice Awards (AMVCA). The shortlisted nominees were revealed during a live broadcast on the Africa Magic Epic Channel on Saturday. The AMVCAs are hosted annually by MultiChoice to honour great achievements in the television and cinema industries. The thriller, directed by Dumie Manyathela, Rodney Mabaleka and DaKudu is nominated alongside Hairareb – Dantagos, Jimmy – Melani, Black Dollar – David Kazadi and Maria Kristu – Paul.S.Wilo. The awards are scheduled to take place on May 14 after a one-year hiatus. The production has been acknowledged yet again following the National Arts Merit Award (Nama) nomination for the Outstanding Screen production. In an interview, the movie’s director Manyathela said the AMVCA nomination has brought back confidence in the country’s film and television industry. “The team is really grateful for this nomination, all glory be unto God. We believe that the nomination has brought back confidence in the film and television industry not only in Bulawayo but in Zimbabwe at large as it’s seen as a seal of approval from veteran industry professionals. “Veza The Unfolding being an indie no-budget film that was nominated in the AMVCA is proof that the product has established a benchmark in Zimbabwe. I believe that we’re a living testimony of the great potential we have in telling authentic, cinematic Zimbabwean stories to the world,” said Manyathela.  He expressed optimism that this may entice the corporate world to invest in the film and television industry. Manyathela said they are committed to build a respectable film industry in Bulawayo and beyond. “Bulawayo is known as the hub of arts and entertainment, rich in its vibrant multi-culture, talent, passion and architecture which can add more value in telling cinematic Zimbabwean stories. Therefore, the whole inspiration for this energy is that we are trying to build a lucrative and respectable film industry, especially in Bulawayo and at the same time strategically telling our stories to the world. “By doing so, our motive is to brand and package Zimbabwe for the international market. Bear in mind we do not see filmmaking as a hobby but as a business and investment. We really hope that in 2022, the Zimbabwean corporate world, art and culture societies and the Government will see the need to capacitate and invest in film producers. “This would help us resuscitate and build the film and television industry which will indeed promote inclusive and sustainable growth, full and productive work and economic employment for all,” he said. Manyathela said they had hoped to turn the production into a series but this has not come to fruition due to financial constraints. “We are in the Writer’s Room dealing with the development of the story and characters. We are therefore, appealing to stakeholders to fund the production of the series. We’re optimistic about the nomination and hoping to bring the award home. “What we are grateful for is that Zimbabwe is represented and the nomination inspires an up-and-coming film producer’s new beginning.” Manyathela encouraged fellow film producers to collaborate saying there is a lot of progress in the power of one. “Collaboration gives room for people to grow and step out of their comfort zones, improve their skills and talent as well as discover new ones. For example, in the production of the film, one of our lead actors Calvin Madula is more than what people know him for. He did some of the choreography and also had his input towards the narrative of Veza, showing his potential as a film director and producer,” said Manyathela. Veza: The Unfolding, a movie that was premièred at Ster-Kinekor cinemas in Bulawayo last year, was produced by Dream Made Films in association with Rodney Films and AfroJams Studios. The movie’s screenplay was written by Laura Bonginkosi. The cast has Madula and Lungile Ndlovu as the main characters. Other notable supporting cast members are Natasha Dlamini, Percy Soko and Nonkanyiso Mabaleka. Bonginkosi said the film seeks to tell an African story. “Veza is an action thriller film that follows the lives of a police force in Bulawayo. It follows an ambitious young recruit, Detective Mxolisi Moyo as he investigates a high profile case which unveils some shocking conspiracies. It was shot in different locations in Bulawayo,” Bonginkosi said. “Veza was inspired by the desire to tell a different African story while at the same time, tackling issues such as corruption,” she said. – @SeehYvonne