The Chronicle Thandeka Moyo-Ndlovu, Senior Health Reporter
A BULAWAYO woman from Pumula East suburb is seeking financial assistance from well-wishers to help pay for surgery for her 15-year-old daughter suffering from Xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) The child, Lettwin was diagnosed with XP, a hereditary condition characterised by extreme sun sensitivity, leading to a very high risk of skin cancer while in Grade One.  So far 10 surgeries have been performed on her face and she has been in and out of hospital for the past nine years. During one of the surgeries, the 15-year-old lost her left eye after radiotherapy was used to treat a tumour. Most people with XP develop multiple skin cancers during their lifetime and these tumours occur most often on the face, lips and eyelids. The girl is in need of US$58 000 to undergo an urgent bone marrow surgery in India and a corneal transplant in South Africa. Besides the emotional, physical and financial strain that XP has left on Lettwin and her mother, she was also denied a childhood memory of playing outdoors and indulging in sweet treats as these could have easily worsened her condition. The girl is one of 20 percent of children who survive childhood cancers in low-income countries, including Zimbabwe. In an interview, her mother Ms Nobesuthu Ngwenya said she lives off vending and as a single mother, she is not able to raise the needed amount. The condition has also affected her daughter’s confidence as a teenager as several surgeries have been done on her face to stop the rapid growth of cancer cells. “We have been advised to seek medical attention in India and South Africa as one of her eyes has been affected due to the Xeroderma. We therefore appeal to well-wishers to help us save my daughter’s life so that she too can lead a normal life,” said Ms Ngwenya. “She is an intelligent girl and it breaks my heart daily to see that this condition may affect her future prospects as I believe in her potential despite Xeroderma. Ms Ngwenya said her wish is to have the surgeries done soon so that Lettwin can heal and recover soon before resuming her studies. “She is a dedicated and hardworking learner and I wish to see her proceed academically because she is gifted. We pray that we get help as we have been surviving through grace and supportive family members and other well-wishers,” she said. Those willing to assist Lettwin can contact Nobesuthu Ngwenya on 0772 973 188 for calls, WhatsApp, and Eco-Cash. Well-wishers can also use the following banking details: Steward Bank FCA Nostro 1043995886, Steward Bank RTGS 1023554727, Steward Bank visa card 19330607, or ZB Bank 4307174549201. — @thamamoe