The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
RATANANG FC executive chairman Tadious Ngwenya is delighted that his club sealed a partnership deal with Nokel Security. The side, which plies its trade in the Zifa Southern Region Division One League, received a shot in the arm when Nokel Security signed to cater for transport, referees’ fees and player winning bonuses, among other costs which may arise during the course of the season. Ngwenya said the coming on board of Nokel Security was going to help his side, which has been struggling financially. “The event is a remarkable milestone in our life and journey as a team playing in the Southern Region Division One League. This team started as a social club during the lockdown in the suburb of Cowdray Park. We came up with this project after realising that most of the youth in our community were idle and we needed to give them something to do,” said Ngwenya. “We engaged Zifa Southern Region for a slot in Division One and they said yes. That is how we ended up in Division One. We chose to go for a slot in Division One because we wanted something which becomes more of employment than playing for fun. The coming in of Nokel Security is going to help us a lot financially. It will ease our burden on some of the costs that we incur during the season.” Nokel Security marketing manager Benson Dube said: “We decided to partner with Ratanang largely because of the professionalism that the club has shown. We are doing this as part of our social corporate responsibility. We will be assisting the club in ensuring that they reach their full potential.” Ratanang are coached by Innocent Mapuranga and Chipo Tsodzo, and are currently fifth on the league table with 16 points from 10 games.  They are eight points behind log leaders Hwange FC, which is impressive given that this is their maiden season in Division One. James Chivasa, who once played for Flame Lily in the topflight league, captains the side that also has Ryan Mabhena and Graciano Chakafana, who once played for Highlanders under Kelvin Kaindu. Mabhena also played for Shabanie and had a stint in Botswana. – @innocentskizoe