The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
VICTORIA Falls’ luxury hotel, Stanley and Livingstone Boutique, is set to resume full-scale operations this week after the completion of the US$5 million refurbishment of its rooms.  Operated by the More Family since 2017, the 16 luxurious suite-hotel had been closed for the past two years because of Covid-19. It is located in a private game ranch just outside the resort city and is one of the many facilities that make up the collection of the More Family. Others are Lion Sands Game Reserve, Marataba Game Reserve, Ursula’s Homestead, Cape Cadogan Boutique Hotel and More Quarters Neighbourhood Hotel, all in South Africa. With outdoor activities including interaction with wildlife, Stanley and Livingstone offers a perfect family or private environment to  clients. The facility is the only one in the region giving clients a full experience of the ‘Big Five’ because of the presence of the rhino and as such is dubbed “An African Eden.” Other operators may have four of the Big Five minus the rhino, which is only found at Stanley and Livingstone in the whole of Matabeleland North. Stanley and Livingstone management said it used the Covid-19 lockdown period to refurbish its hotel. Last Friday the hotel hosted an event where it officially announced to industry players that it will be re-opening this coming Friday and has already secured 60 percent bookings for the 16 suites. Hotel proprietor, Mr Robert More, said: “this is not re-opening for us only but it’s the re-opening of the industry”. He said the hotel will be offering a 30 percent discount on re-opening. General manager, Mr Allan Bailes, said the past two years were difficult as the hotel had to dig into all its savings while some measures were initiated to survive. “We are very excited to be involved in Stanley and Livingstone and we undertook a US$5 million-dollar refurbishment on our 16-bedroom property where we did a lot of work to brand as a luxury boutique hotel. “Today’s celebration marks our re-opening on 1st April. It’s more than just re-opening for us but for whole industry as Victoria Falls City is dependent on tourism. Our hope is that 2022 will be a true recovery year for our industry. Obviously it will take a few years for us to recover,” said Mr Bailes. He said the refurbishment was extensive as all rooms were re-done to move away from the traditional suite style with separate bedroom and separate lounge, into modern whole suite property. All furniture and fittings were changed while all main areas were rebuilt in glass so as to bring more light, as well as expanding them. The main area at the entrance presents a clear view of the jungle on the west, especially on the top deck and the restaurant and bar for sunset and game view. “We dug into our savings and that has been done in anticipation for additional rooms to be added,” said Mr Bailes.
North America and Europe were Stanley and Livingstone’s main source markets before the outbreak of the global pandemic. Besides embarking on massive refurbishment, the hotel also set three main objectives of safety of staff and guests, business preservation and salary restoration. “Occupancy is 60 percent in April and these are largely new clients. This is not just a matter of even reaching occupancies that we were before but the recovery process has to happen,” said Mr Bailes. “Looking at the bookings that we have this year, I think it’s safe to say our  source market hasn’t really changed since Covid-19. “We have maintained our three objectives but at the same time we have lost staff because to survive as a business certain sacrifices have to be made. “We have now structured things differently because of uncertainty and some staff are brought when required.” On full operation, the hotel employs 150 people. Mr Bailes said the hotel was ready to welcome back guests but implored authorities to further relax PCR tests requirements as has happened in neighbouring countries. Tourism was the hardest hit sectors by the Covid-19 pandemic, which led to international travel restrictions and subsequently closure of facilities and suspension of airline services. Some hotels and tourism operators have resumed operations. A number of airlines have resumed flights to Victoria Falls. — @ncubeleon