The Chronicle Oliver Kazunga, Senior Business Reporter
AUSTRALIA Stock Exchange-listed Invictus Energy Limited, has completed data processing of the 2021 seismic survey for the Muzarabani oil and gas project as well as the concurrent reprocessing of a legacy Mobil dataset.  Invictus, which is developing the Cabora Bassa oil and gas project in Muzarabani, Mashonaland Central province, is reprocessing data from an initial seismic survey that was done in the 1990s by Mobil, a France-headquartered company. Despite undertaking the initial seismic survey in the Cabora Bassa area, Mobil decided not to follow it up and thus Invictus, using more modern data processing techniques, reprocessed the data gathered and found strong evidence that the underlying geological structures had the domes and traps that could indicate oil and gas in Muzarabani. In oil and gas exploration, seismic survey refers to the process of using high-tech equipment to listen to underground vibrations in order to determine the existence of hydro-carbons. “Data processing of the 2021 Cabora Bassa 2D Seismic Survey (CB21 survey) and concurrent reprocessing of a legacy Mobil dataset has largely been completed by onshore high-resolution data specialists Earth Signal Processing in Calgary, Canada. “All key products have been received by Invictus and seismic interpretation is progressing well,” it said. The acquisition and data processing of the CB21 survey, along with the reprocessing of 1990 Mobil survey data has achieved the objectives of providing a high quality, comprehensive 2D data set which is contractor-consistent and process-consistent. The parameters employed for the acquisition of the CB21 survey, along with modern data processing technology have significantly elevated the data quality to a high                                                                                           standard. “As the interpretation is progressing, multiple anomalies have been noted in the basin’s seismic data. “These can often be indicators for the presence of hydrocarbons. Examples of these are provided in the images overpage. “These anomalies will be investigated with additional data processing products produced by Earth Signal Processing. “Their geophysical signature, as well as trapping geometry and position (structurally and stratigraphically) will then be evaluated,” said Invictus. It is hoped that this would allow the anomalies to be assessed and ranked to ascertain the likelihood of viable hydrocarbons within a definable trap. Invictus managing director Mr Scott Macmillan commented: “The maiden drilling programme to test the world-class Muzarabani prospect is coming together well. “We are pleased to have secured Exalo’s rig 202 as well as well services with Baker Hughes and long-lead items. “The final seismic data has provided evidence of multiple trapping geometries and a target rich environment for the upcoming drilling programme.” The drilling campaign is scheduled to commence in June this year and  Invictus is working towards a two-well programme. “The Company is maturing additional potential within our acreage and continuing to build on our significant prospective resource inventory,” he said.  —@KazungaOliver