The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Chronicle Reporter YOUNG Women for Economic Development (YWED) Gwanda chapter has ventured into agriculture as a way of empowering women in the mining town and surrounding areas. The chapter which was launched in January is focusing on poultry and horticulture after members received inputs from Affirmative Action Group (AAG) Matabeleland South chapter vice-president who is a prominent businessman and Zanu-PF Matabeleland South province youth league executive Cde Fisani Moyo. YWED received 2 000-day old chicks and 10 000 seedlings of onions. Beneficiaries will undertake the projects at their homes.
Cde Moyo said YWED members must fully execute business strategies to ensure that their businesses realise profits and growth.  “As I always encourage young people across Matabeleland South region, the only way to success is through sacrifice and financial discipline. If you are not financially disciplined you will never progress in life. “As YWED start their first project, I urge every young woman to exercise business values of separating capital and profits, save and reinvest your capital to grow your business,” said Cde Moyo. He said if they dream big, they surely will achieve all their desires as long as they are determined. “My wish is to see young women securing tenders from local authorities be it in mining and getting into mining. As the ruling party secretary for Indigenisation and Economic Empowerment in the province I will do everything in my power to make sure at least you get tenders in the near future,” said Cde Moyo. YWED national programmes coordinator Ms Sithabile Gandi Ndlovu said the donation speaks volumes of contribution women make in the agriculture industry. “Prevailing statistics reveal that 70 percent of farmers in Zimbabwe are women, making agriculture a women dominated space. “The relentless participation of women in this sector eventually goes a long way in advancing agricultural development and food security especially against a background where a series of policy mechanisms such as the Command Agriculture, Presidential input scheme and the Pfumvudza/Intwasa farming programme, which are all being rolled by Government to spearhead economic development,” she said. Ms Gandi Ndlovu said women’s participation in economic development ensures financial inclusion. “This is important especially at this time when the Second Republic has made frantic efforts to empower young women by setting up a plethora of mechanisms which cater for the financial inclusion and empowerment of women which the YWED must also make use of,” said Ms Gandi Ndlovu. YWED Gwanda district vice chairperson Mrs Loveness Sarah Mujabuki said: “An empowered woman is unstoppable and we want to thank our well-wishers who want to see women taking up space. “Special mention goes to the AAG vice-president for being our brother and true leader,” she said. — @mthabisi_mthire