The Chronicle Mbulelo Mpofu, Showbiz Reporter
AN opportunity for local actors has arisen as local filmmakers from Jewels Embryonic Studios will hold auditions for an upcoming drama series titled 8’ta Z’khuphan’  . On Friday, casting for actors will be conducted at Inyathi Youth Centre in Mpopoma. Filmmaker, writer and CEO of Jewel Embryonic Studios Linos “Brilaizer” Tapera said they are looking for those with street cred. “The criteria for those who will be chosen is simple. We’re looking for those who appreciate kasi life. We’re calling on actors aged between 16 and 48 years to come and audition,” Tapera said. “Since 8’ta Z’khuphan’ is a kasi type of drama series, we need actors who know how to articulate kasi way of life.  As content creators, we realised that we were now running away from the rawness of ikasi, that terrifying kasi we grew up in to participate in a classic lifestyle we do not even know about hence our decision to come up with this production, “ he said. Expounding what the new series will be about, Tapera said it will expose problems that torch bearers in the hood. “8ta Z’khuphan’ is a drama series about horrifying moments that dreamers tend to face and circumstances of poverty that will be trying to bring them down. “It’s about poverty being the dream killer for a lot of people. It’s about youth adventures found in ekasi, early unplanned pregnancies, jealousy and mostly, hatred. It is a series aimed at reviving the dreams of people coming from disadvantaged homes. “It aims to educate and instruct the girl child on the principles of living in this world. It aims to nurture a nation from the evil associated with living on the fastlane,” he added. Tapera expressed gratitude and utmost faith in the production saying the response has been amazing. “The response has been great so far as most people are promising to come and participate. I didn’t know that there are a lot of actors out there that want an opportunity like this till we extended the auditions call. Now I know we are not leading a blind industry.” “No lie, the future is bright for the film industry in Bulawayo. We even had actors from Harare calling in to audition, but unfortunately, because of funds, we won’t be able to cater for them, “ he said. Once complete, the new drama series will premiere on the Jewels Embryonic Studios YouTube channel. In its embryonic stages, Jewels Embryonic Studios has enjoyed relative success with their Love Lies drama series which is airing on their YouTube channel. – @eMKlass_49