The Chronicle Yoliswa Dube-Moyo, Matabeleland South Bureau Chief THE Municipality of Gwanda is in the process of sourcing funds to buy equipment that will be used to operate a landfill and close the dumpsite that was condemned 10 years ago due to its proximity to homes. The dumpsite poses a public health threat as some children have turned it into a playground and residents have had to put up with hazardous smoke coming from the dumpsite. Recent studies have found that air pollution is linked to childhood cancers and cognitive impairment in both children and adults. Prolonged exposure to air pollution can also lead to heart and lung-related illnesses. Residents have since engaged the council to move the dumpsite which they say is affecting them. The dumpsite has also become a feeding ground for baboons and monkeys that have become a menace. The local authority has constructed a compliance landfill which is expected to start operating by the end of next month once the appropriate equipment has been procured.  Gwanda Mayor Councillor Njabulo Siziba said the local authority was seeking funds to source equipment to operate the landfill. “Plans are underway to source equipment and we hope to be allocated money from the devolution funds. There are now houses near the dumpsite so it’s pushing us to move away from that area,” said Clr Siziba. The old dumpsite is situated between Joshua Mqabuko Polytechnic College and Hlalani Kuhle/Garikai houses. Clr Siziba said the local authority was aware of the health risks the dumpsite was posing to residents adding that efforts were being made to move away from the old dumpsite by next month. “Our target to set up the landfill is April. We will then commission the landfill once we have an excavator, roller and other equipment required for the operation. A landfill operates differently from a dumpsite so we need the appropriate equipment,” he said. In order for the landfill to start functioning, a compactor, bulldozer, front-end loader, excavator, weighing scale and a self-weighing compactor truck are needed. The town’s principal environmental health technician Mr Qondiso Dube said the landfill would solve the waste disposal challenges the town is facing. “As council, we’re aware of the challenges of the dumpsite and the solution is the landfill. We’re waiting for equipment so that we can start using the landfill. If we start using it now with no proper equipment, it will become another dumpsite and we don’t want that,” said Mr Dube. Modern landfills are well-engineered and managed facilities for the disposal of solid waste. Landfills are located, designed, operated and monitored to ensure compliance with regulations. They are also designed to protect the environment from contaminants, which may be present in the waste stream. Landfills cannot be built in environmentally-sensitive areas, and they are placed using on-site environmental monitoring systems. These monitoring systems check for any sign of groundwater contamination and for landfill gas as well as provide additional safeguards. — @Yolisswa