The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter HWANGE FC coach Bongani Mafu believes it’s early days to talk about the title despite his side clocking 10 unbeaten games in the Zifa Southern Region Division One League. Chipangano were relegated from the topflight league in 2019 and currently enjoy a two-point lead at the top and remain the only undefeated side in the 18-team league. They have an incredible goal difference of 19, while second-placed Arenel, who are also title favourites alongside ZPC Hwange and Talen Vision, have a goal difference of 10. The 2019 drop from the elite league was Hwange’s third since 2007 when they spent just one season in the second tier before reclaiming their place with the big boys in 2009. They suffered the same fate 10 years later in 2017, and again spent a year in Division One before returning in 2019. But this time a combination of factors, largely administrative, saw the side failing to last more than one season in the PSL as they were sent packing at the end of the 2019 season. With such an impressive background of quick returns after just a year, coupled with how things have turned out in 10 games so far, Hwange supporters could be sensing Premiership action come 2023.  However, the man tasked with captaining their ship is not popping the champagne yet, and says the journey is still long and possibly hazardous along the way. “The season has only just started. Ten games played out of 34 is far too few for one to be considered a championship contender,” said Mafu. He said football dynamics are yet to manifest and as such as Hwange, they are only interested in a game-by-game performance and will only be in a position to start talking about the league title halfway in the second round of the season, and not now. “The dynamics of football are yet to kick in. We are looking at game-by-game performances. May we discuss PSL chances halfway through the second round,” said Mafu who revealed that his switch to the coal mining town has been excellent. He also applauded the training facilities at the Colliery. Hwange has battle hardened players that know what is expected of them. The likes of Felix Chindungwe, Thabani Goredema, Canaan Nkomo, Shepherd Gadzikwa, Munyaradzi Mungadze, Ernest Gwitima, Brian Mlotshwa, Kelly Shiyandandi, Courage Sibanda and goalkeeper Nedrick Mandeya are part of Mafu’s troops in this battle for Premiership football.