The Chronicle Sukulwenkosi Dube-Matutu, Chronicle Reporter 
“CHINA Shops,” as they are popularly known, are providing the much-needed relief to consumers through offering a variety of products at affordable prices. The shops emerged in the country around 2009 and have remained popular since then. At the time the country was going through economic challenges punctuated by runaway inflation but China Shops came to the aid of many.  When they opened, they were owned by Chinese nationals who were mainly selling products from their home country, hence the name of the shops. Over the years ownership has evolved as they are now being run by locals. Their products are local and imported. China Shops are generally busy throughout the month but there is a hype of activity during month ends or when they have specials. They provide a wide range of products which comprise stationery, kitchen ware, foot wear, clothing, hardware, toys, grocery items and plastic products among others. Up to today, China Shops have remained popular among consumers with some preferring to do their shopping there because of their competitive prices. Miss Loveness Nyathi from Bulawayo said China Shops have been of great help to her. “When China Shops first opened, I was sceptical of them because I thought their products were poor quality. I have managed to buy a number of durable products from China Shops and their prices are affordable. I remember when these shops opened, a lot of people were flocking there and some people were also buying products for resale,” she said. Miss Nyathi said while China Shops are no longer cheap like before their prices are lower compared to other shops. She said some products are sold in China Shops at half the price of the same products in other shops. Mrs Fellunah Mswere from Gwanda District said she can get a wide variety of products from the shops. “There are a lot of products that I can get from Chinese Shops from clothing for children to adults and even kitchen ware. There are some products that we can’t find from supermarkets or other shops but we know we can get from China Shops. They are like a big box of assorted biscuits where you can get variety,” she said. Mr Titus Tshuma from Bulawayo recalled that when China Shops opened, they became a source of livelihood for many, him included. He said he used to buy some products from the shops in bulk which he went on to sell in Cowdray Park where he lives. A manager of a China Shop in Gwanda, Mr Talent Sibanda said they ensure that their prices remain lower than other shops. “Our kind of shops are generally known as China Shops but in actual fact we have trading names. Ours is Costhum Trading. We have branches in Bulawayo and Harare as well as several other towns. We have carried on the trend which was left by the Chinese of selling products at lower prices. Some of our products are manufactured locally while others are imported but we always try to keep our prices low,” he said. Mr Sibanda said they also strive to provide customers with a wide range of products. He said stocking was, however, a challenge due to the effects of the Covid-19 pandemic. Ministry of Industry and Commerce Matabeleland South provincial deputy director, Mr Richmond Ncube said China Shops were first established in big cities and then spread to small towns. He said when they opened, their products were mainly from China. Mr Ncube said products found in China Shops are now being drawn from a number of countries with some being manufactured locally. “We saw China Shops sprouting in 2009 as a result of a shortage of products. The Chinese realised a gap in that area and they opened shops which were mainly selling Chinese products hence the name ‘China Shops’. At that time most of their products were pegged at US$1 for 2. This created an impression that the Chinese shops were very cheap and they became very popular. In addition, they have a wide variety of products,” he said. Mr Ncube said the shops are however owned by locals. He said though their prices were still lower than other shops they had slightly gone up due to economic challenges. He said China Shops have managed to bring huge relief to consumers. He said establishment of China Shops in 2009 also resulted in the employment of local people. Mr Ncube said while indigenous people were now running these shops they were however still being identified as “China Shops”. – @DubeMatutu.