The Chronicle Sikhulekelani Moyo, Business Reporter
BULAWAYO Mining Company (BMC) has pledged to ramp up output at its How Mine plant in line with Government’s targets to achieve a US$12 billion mining milestone by 2023.  In remarks during a technical tour of the mine by members of the Association of Mine Managers of Zimbabwe on Friday, BMC managing director Mr Kimbton Chiota said the company was focused on contributing more towards achievement of the Government’s Vision 2030. “We are fully committed to the Government’s several growth initiatives that include a US$12 billion mining industry by 2023. We will as BMC do our best to ensure the Government target is met while at the same time contributing to the development of the community,” said Mr Chiota. He said the company was fully cognisant of the Government’s vision of a prosperous and empowered upper-middle income society by the year 2030 and its associated goals and targets. Mr Chiota said like Government, the company was working towards attainment of a stable micro-economic environment and economic transformation sustained by high productive levels while paying close attention to the five-year National Development Strategy driven by the 14 national priorities that include economic growth and sustainability, all buttressed by a productive and sustainable mining industry. The Second Republic led by President Mnangagwa has emphasised that mining and agriculture are key sectors that should lead in terms of transforming the economy towards an upper middle-income status by 2030. Mr Chiota said BMC was embarking on a number of projects aimed at increasing output. “We are working on the second phase shaft deepening from level 32 to 36. The first phase was commissioned in 2020 and saw production increase by 59 percent in 2021,” he said. The company is also engaged in exploration both on surface and underground while two contractors are  drilling, said Mr Chiota. He said these processes will be complemented by enhanced milling. Speaking at the same event, BMC mine manager Mr Elton Gwatidzo who is also the president of AMMZ said the company owned by Metallion group of mines, has been doing well since establishment. “In 2021 our production improved by 59 percent following the deepening of the shaft which was was commissioned in 2020. In 2021 we also broke a couple of records as we started operating our plant at 33 000 tonnes per month,” said Mr Gwatidzo. — @SikhulekelaniM1