The Chronicle Sikhulekelani Moyo, Business Reporter
GREEN Afrique Technologies (GAT) has urged young farmers to venture into granadilla farming saying that the industry has very good opportunities to reduce poverty and help the country attain Vision 2030. Through Vision 2030, the Second Republic has set a national target of ensuring Zimbabwe attains an upper middle-income economy status. GAT is a private organisation that works with small-scale farmers and marginalised communities across the country creating a vibrant, robust and efficient agri-business value chain with the objective of stimulating local economies as well as empowering smallholder farmers through capacity building, strategic partnerships and market linkages, among others. Speaking during a two-day granadilla farming training session that began in Bulawayo on Wednesday, GAT chief executive officer Mr Anglistone Sibanda said Zimbabwean youths should not wait for foreign investors to build their country. He said the young generation should rise and engage in farming which is a key economic enabler in Zimbabwe adding that granadilla production is a multi-million dollar project as the export market is readily available for the fruit. “Zimbabwe has very good climatic conditions and soils for agriculture and granadilla farming will help to end poverty among youths. “Markets are there because as GAT we also do market research to assist farmers to market their produce,”said Mr Sibanda.  The two-day training programme was jointly organised by GAT, Empower Bank, Youth Zimbabwe Trust and Ministry of Youths, Sport, Arts and Recreation to encourage youths to venture into granadilla farming. Mr Sibanda said those who wish to grow granadilla will be given funds to set up irrigation system and buy other needed inputs such as seeds. “Empower Bank will help to fund the programme and as GAT, we will give the youths seeds at subsidised prices because each granadilla seed cost about US$10, but we will sell to the youths at US$0,75 and this will help to reduce the amount of capital required to start growing granadilla,” he said. In an interview, a consultant who spoke on quality control for the agricultural practice Miss Gugu Gumede said youths should take advantage of such opportunities to improve their livelihoods. “Youths should venture into farming which guarantees them a good future instead of waiting for formal employment which might not come,” she said. The youths who attended the training session said GAT has opened their minds as most of them will not be idle at home when they complete their university education. “We are grateful for this programme because GAT has opened our minds and we will not wait for formal employment but venture into farming,” said Mr Tendai Makiwa one of the trainees. Another trainee Miss Linnet Ncube said the training programme will enable them to meaningfully contribute to attaining Vision 2030. “This programme will help us to work towards Vision 2030 as youths because we will be able to contribute to economic growth,” she said.