The Chronicle Mbulelo Mpofu/Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Reporters
IN 2020, Bulawayo’s hip-hop industry woke up to the shocking death of Calvin “Cal Vin” Nhliziyo and since then, artistes have kept his legacy alive through dedications and release of collaborations. The Roil Bulawayo Arts Awards renamed the Outstanding Hip-Hop Act Award to The Calvin Mgcini Nhliziyo Hip-Hop Award in honour of the Z’khuphan hit-maker and last year, rapper Brintz released a song titled Vin Con$ciou$.  Rapper, Rockie DoUb (real name Warren Nigel Moyo) is the latest to join the bandwagon with his eMoyo EP that is set to be launched later this month, keeping Cal Vin’s legacy alive. Rockie DoUb said the EP features a song that he recorded with Cal Vin two weeks before his demise. “I recorded a song titled Get Mine with the late Cal Vin two weeks before he died. I just thought it made sense to release it now so as to keep his legacy and spirit alive. The album serves as a teaser to my upcoming album due to be released by the end of June titled RAIA. “I’ll disclose what it means when I do the roll out soon,” said the rapper. He said the EP is a trial for his musical abilities as he fused different genres. “Generally, this compilation of songs is about me testing my skills and abilities with different genres. I wanted to fuse Hip-hop and Amapiano while also showing the power of collaborations hence the many features I have. “I named the album after my surname as an appreciation of the Moyo clan.” The seven-track EP features a host of local acts who include Kuly Tangu, T3rry Tempo, Mlue Jay and Fab G just to mention a few. Rockie DoUb is a four-time Pogues Zim Hip-hop nominee and a one-time Roil BAA nominee. Meanwhile, kwaito sensation Mzistozz Mfanafuthi, who has been on a music hiatus since the death of the king of rap Cal Vin two years ago, has bounced back. Cal Vin had a soft spot for young talent, something that was proven by the youthful army he recruited at his Kontrol Tribe Studio. These included the Kwaito Boys Mawiza, Mzistozz Mfanafuthi, Frost and Tebza. Together, these artistes were rising in the music industry. But sadly, Cal Vin died in October 2020 disturbing their plans. Among those affected was Mzistozz Mfanafuthi as he went off the radar. But now, it seems he has healed. He recently released his first solo offering titled uKiacy. A fusion of Amapiano and kwaito beats, the track that was mixed and mastered at Tarryn Talana Studios features producers Maverlous Da DJ, Cyd Bass and Tiyelani Chauke. Mzistozz Mfanafuthi said accepting the loss of Cal Vin was not easy. “It hasn’t been easy coming to terms with Cal Vin’s death. I took some time off from music as a solo artiste to try and recover. I used the time to learn more about the game,” said Mzistozz Mfanafuthi.