The Chronicle Sikhulekelani Moyo, Business Reporter
MARKETING professionals should engage in meaningful networking to help their organisations market their brands to improve sales and profitability, Professionals Business Association of Zimbabwe president Dr Lucky Mlilo, has said. He said this during a business luncheon hosted by the Marketers Association of Zimbabwe (MAZ) in Bulawayo last Friday. MAZ is a membership body established in 2007 and its mandate is to uplift the marketing profession after the realisation that the marketing profession in Zimbabwe was not being given the recognition it deserves. The association also represents a broad spectrum of marketing-related professionals which include sales, business development, media, advertising, customer service, public relations and digital marketing among others. Addressing marketers at the luncheon, Dr Mlilo said for any organisation to boost its business, marketing professionals should have meaningful connections through networking. “When building personal brands, we open first golden opportunities for networking both online and offline. “This strategy does not only open new jobs and opportunities but also creates lasting relationships you will build on,” he said. The event was held under the theme, “The Power of Networking Boost your Brand”. Dr Mlilo also said marketers can create meaningful connections by being active on different social media platforms. “Being active on LinkedIn, Facebook groups and Twitter will show others that you are serious about becoming a valuable contributor in connections. “Joining like groups for your niche and actively participating in conversations, you are attracting like-minded individuals to your brand and attending events through professional meetings will also help grow your network,” he said. Dr Mlilo noted that networking was an on-going process that requires attention, goodwill and persistence. Good networking, he said, was about support and the best networkers are considered givers as givers understand that good networking is about helping people. “There are three types of networkers that are not effective and these are askers, takers and traders. “Like any future of any relationship, the more you put in, the more you gain so avoid looking too much on what others can do for you but think about how you can help somebody else”. Speaking at the same occasion, MAZ co-ordinator Mrs Kudakwashe Dliwayo said her association has some courses that marketers can do to enhance their marketing careers. She said MAZ was offering different programmes in conjunction with local institutions of higher learning such as Midlands State University. In her welcoming remarks, the Zimbabwe International Trade Fair (ZITF) Company deputy chief executive officer, Ms Stella Nkomo said marketers should be more passionate about their work particularly during this era of the Covid-19 pandemic, which brought most of business issues to a halt. – @SikhulekelaniM1