The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Chronicle Reporter
YOUNG Women for Economic Development (YWED) have spread wings abroad after a diaspora chapter was launched in Dubai. The chapter was launched by Information, Publicity and Broadcasting Services Minister, Monica Mutsvangwa last week on Sunday. Addressing delegates during the launch, Minister Mutsvangwa said she was impressed with the zeal of YWED since it was launched barely a year ago.  “I didn’t realise that you (YWED) were ready and bringing it to Dubai, I am thoroughly impressed. I want to salute all of you and say we really look up to you as young women. “I joined the liberation struggle when I was 15 and as women, we want at one point to rest and we want those young women who come after us to continue carrying the torch and thus they have a responsibility of carrying on board all women,” said Minister Mutsvangwa. Minister Mutsvangwa hailed the YWED for its visibility locally where it is vibrant in all the country’s 10 provinces. “These young women are like a veld fire and they are saying they have seen the opportunities that Government has put across and they want to take up the opportunities. “As a group you move with greater impact as you can’t move alone,” said Minister Mutsvangwa.
YWED national programmes co-ordinator and Head of Delegation in Dubai Ms Sithabile Gandi Ndlovu said young people have a demanding and daunting task to facilitate the building of a great nation of Zimbabwe. “The Second Republic has made frantic efforts to empower young women by setting up a plethora of mechanisms which cater for the financial inclusion and empowerment of women which the YWED will make use of. “Young women and youths in general suffer the most as a result of the sanctions because they have resulted in the economic haemorrhage of the country at large as well as cutting long term investments and fiscal support,” she said. “Under the capable leadership of His Excellency Dr ED Mnangagwa and the Second Republic we are certain that we will prevail.” YWED Diaspora chapter head Ms Salome Eric said the launch was a significant day for all young people living in the Diaspora as it paved the way for them to carry forward with their initiatives aimed at ensuring that Vision 2030 is achieved. YWED Bulawayo chairperson Mrs Sandra Ndebele-Sibindi said they are excited that young women in the creative arts industry from Matebeleland have had the opportunity to participate in the expo. “We are grateful for the opportunities provided for us by YWED and we look forward to more participation in the creative sector,” said Mrs Ndebele-Sibindi. — @mthabisi_mthire