The Chronicle Patrick Chitumba, Midlands Bureau Chief AFTER being an orphan at the age of 13, a Zimbabwean entrepreneur gave up on school after writing his Ordinary Levels and went through many struggles, but perseverance paid as he is now an employer of over 500. This is the story of Dr Barnabas Marambire (40), who is based in Zvishavane. At the age of 19 after completing his Ordinary Levels, Dr Marambire failed to get funds to further his education since his parents had died. He was hired at a farm as a herdboy in Chivi before he went to Botswana to look for employment. At the age of 25, he managed to register his company in Botswana and operated it for four years before he moved back to Zimbabwe where he started a construction company, Barmlo Investments. Dr Marambire is now a proud employer of over 500 and last week he won the Best Businessman of the Year Award (2021) during the Great Dyke Agriculture and Mining Awards held at the Village Lodge in Gweru. Dr Marambire won the award which covers the Great Dyke region. His company supplies hardware such as building material; timber, iron sheets and bricks. It is also a construction company. Dr Marambire was recently conferred with an Honorary Doctorate of Humane Letters Degree by the International Institute of Philanthropy in partnership with the International Women’s University. “Well, to me winning this award reflects that our efforts are being recognised and it’s motivation to keep doing more. My advice is don’t give up so easily. Business is for serious people, and you should always remember that your success is your responsibility. “You cannot expect success in your life if you are not prepared to participate in the process. I only went to school up to Form 4 then failed to further my studies due to lack of funds,” he said. The father of three said his background — being an orphan at an early age — taught him to be very strong and committed to being a pace setter. “Above all, I believe in God and knowing that he has shown me his grace in my upbringing, I am always inspired. My wife and children always motivate me and inspire me to continue working even when things seem hard. I lost my parents at the age of 13. I then lived a very painful life and ended up working in the farms after completing my O-levels,” he said. Dr Marambire said he worked as a herdboy before going to Botswana where he joined the construction industry and started saving money with the idea of starting his own business. “Those who know how to ride a bicycle, you know how difficult it is in the beginning. You will fall many times, sometimes getting wounded, but eventually you will ride and go without any hustle. It is the same with business, the starting point is always heavy. Unfortunately, many people think that they will start their businesses and cruise like a ship, but that’s not the case,” he said. Dr Marambire said when he registered his brick moulding company, he only had Botswana Pula equivalent to US$100. “For me to run a successful brick moulding business I needed a truck to carry materials and deliver bricks to customers. I needed to hire people to mould bricks. I needed to rent a brick yard for manufacturing. I needed branding and advertising, stationary, protective clothes for employees, brick moulding machine and cement just to name a few. All these required a minimum amount equivalent to US$50 000, but I only had US$100 in my pocket to start this venture,” he said. “Many people who are in the same situation today are busy knocking at different doors for funding, banks, relatives and friends but no one is giving them money. You know why, no one is interested in investing in an idea. You must start something and show people something that exists physically, not just on paper. I never wasted time looking for money, I just said to myself what can I do with that P1 000 equivalent to US$100. It was enough to buy only 10 bags of cement at P55 (equivalent to $5,50) each and the change I bought river sand for brick production, a brick hand mould and hired one person who joined me in brick production.” Dr Marambire said after making their first batch, it took them weeks before they sold a single brick. “We spent our time watering those 380 bricks and arranging them so nicely waiting for our first customer. In the meantime, there was some space in the brick yard, so we also decided to develop a vegetable garden. At last, we received our first customer. This person just came and said he wanted 1 000 bricks, so he told us to increase our stock. We only had 380 bricks in our stock, but the rest is history,” he said. “We started selling vegetables from the vegetable garden at a wholesale price to ladies who were selling at the shops. That was another revenue income.” He said after the first six months he had hired about 12 people. “They were all wearing branded work suits under our trading name Skhano Ltd. I was able to hire a truck for deliveries full time.  With our first year in business, I managed to buy our first truck. This is a very practical lesson which demonstrates that if you are determined you can start with as little as possible and grow it,” said Dr Marambire. He urged people to start small before growing big. “Today someone is saying I have a business idea worth a million so I need funding of about $100 000. My brother, my sister, no one will ever give you that money. If you are serious about business, stand up and start developing your $10 into $15, from $15 to $20 then the process should continue until you reach your goal. That is the only way to go. Never waste your time busy writing long and lucrative business plans, submitting for funding. Even though you are to be given that funding, you still need to learn the business. When I was working with little capital, it was a practical lesson to learn and know my business. I challenge you today to try it,” said Dr Marambire.