The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
OLYMPIAN Ngoni Makusha is among 15 athletes identified by the National Athletics Association of Zimbabwe (Naaz) with potential to qualify for the Africa Senior Championships set for Mauritius in June. Makusha, who represented Zimbabwe in last year’s Olympic Games in Tokyo, is expected to qualify for the 100m and 200m events at the continental meet alongside fellow sprinters Tapiwa Makarawu (200m), Raymon Ngaci (100m and 200m), Dickson Kamungeremu (100m), Garren Muwishi (200m and 400m) and Isaac Mudzi (400m). Middle and long-distance runners shortlisted by Naaz hoping to secure qualification for the Mauritius event are Tapiwa Chineka (800m), Wellington Varevi (1 500m) as well as 10 000m runners Moses Tarakinyo and Fortunate Chidzivo. Other identified athletes are Awakhiwe Ndlovu and Theophilous Mudzengerere, both triple jumpers, sprinters Mitchell Zuze and Samkeliso Ndebele as well as James Mtenje (javelin).  According to the Confederation of Africa Athletics, the qualification deadline is April 30, with performances achieved during official competitions organised in conformity with World athletics rules. Naaz president Tendai Tagara said the shortlisted athletes are training with their respective coaches, with the national association chipping in if they qualify. “Just like what is done in countries like Botswana and South Africa where potential medalists train with their coaches and clubs in preparation for regional and international competitions, that’s the approach we’re taking. These athletes will be going to competitions in and outside the country at invitational regional events in Zambia, Botswana and South Africa with their clubs. As soon as they qualify, Naaz will then come in to assist with preparations Mauritius,” said Tagara. Naaz has also set its own qualifying standard times. “The idea to come up with this shortlist is to inform these athletes that they have the potential to qualify. We have set a standard that we want the athletes to achieve. For example, in 100m they should run 10.18 seconds. We believe the Africa Senior Championships is not a stage to get experience, but to get results for the World Championship, whose qualification for 100m is 10.05 seconds. It does not make sense to send a sprinter running 10.32 seconds when we are chasing such a high performance,” said Tagara. – @ZililoR