The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
THERE is all to play for when Castle Lager Premier Soccer League leaders Chicken Inn take on Ngezi Platinum Stars at Baobab Stadium in Mhondoro this afternoon, with just four points separating the two sides. Chicken Inn lead the pack in a tightly contested championship with 19 points after eight rounds of games, with Ngezi sitting in fourth place with 15 points. It’s a game where visitors Chicken Inn are well aware that a slip will cost them top slot as second-placed Manica Diamonds, who are having a great season so far, are just two points behind them on 17, while Dynamos and Triangle United are tied on 16 points. Chicken Inn, who came from a goal down to beat Black Rhinos 2-1 in their previous encounter, will be banking on their new talisman Brian Muza, the league’s top scorer with seven goals. It will not be a walk in the park for Joey Antipas’ men, who boast of the likes of veteran skipper Moses Jackson, wingback Xolani Ndlovu, Sheppard Mhlanga, George Majika and Itai Mabhunu. Ngezi will want to build consistency and register their third consecutive victory after claiming 3-1 and 1-0 wins over Cranborne Bullets and FC Platinum. Last weekend’s 1-0 win against FC Platinum at Mandava Stadium has given Ngezi reason to believe they have what it takes to win and adding Chicken Inn to their casualties list will place them among the serious title contenders.  McDonald Makuwe, scorer of the solitary goal against FC Platinum, Denver Mukamba, defenders Polite Moyo and Qadr Amin are capable of carrying Ngezi on any given day when in form. While Ngezi fight to close the gap on Chicken Inn, Triangle will be squaring off against Premiership returnees Bulawayo City, who are 14th with six points and just one place above the drop zone. Triangle hammered Whawha 4-1 while City shared the spoils with Yadah in a 0-0 tie last weekend. “What we want is to stay out of relegation. The boys are improving with every outing, gaining confidence with each passing game and what is key is for us to stay focused and maintain concentration throughout the match against Triangle,” said City coach Philani “Beefy” Ncube. Tomorrow, rejuvenated Harare giants Dynamos clash with Harare City whose confidence is high following last weekend’s 2-1 win away to Bulawayo Chiefs. Dynamos seem to have found their rhythm and have won their last three matches and will want to bag all three points to close the gap on the log leaders. Fixtures Today: ZPC Kariba vs Tenax CS FC (Nyamhunga), Herentals vs Caps United (National Sports Stadium), Black Rhinos vs Bulawayo Chiefs (Sakubva), Ngezi Platinum Stars vs Chicken Inn (Baobab), Bulawayo City vs Triangle United (Barbourfields) Tomorrow: Whawha vs Cranbourne Bullets (Ascot), Manica Diamonds vs FC Platinum (Sakubva), Harare City vs Dynamos (National Sports Stadium), Highlanders vs Yadah (Barbourfields) — @ZililoR