The Chronicle Mashudu Netsianda, Senior Reporter
GOVERNMENT has announced that the 42nd Independence Day anniversary will be held in Bulawayo for the first time in the history of the country in line with the Second Republic’s thrust of devolution and decentralisation policy. In the past the Independence celebrations were held in Harare. Bulawayo was scheduled to host the 40th Independence Day celebrations in 2020 before the national event was postponed after Government declared a National Disaster and enforced a lockdown as part of measures to contain the the Covid-19 pandemic. The celebrations and other public events were cancelled in March as part of measures to contain the spread of the pandemic which had started claiming lives globally. In an interview yesterday, Information, Publicity and Broadcasting Services Minister Monica Mutsvangwa said the move by the Government to hold the prestigious national event in Bulawayo is in line with the New Dispensation’s thrust of devolution.  “This year our Independence Day anniversary is being celebrated in Bulawayo. This is in line with the Second Republic’s thrust of devolution and decentralisation,” she said. “Bulawayo being the second largest city and a major sub-regional metropolis, it is natural that it gets that first honour, which shall also be subsequently be enjoyed by all provinces as this practice takes root.” Minister Mutsvangwa said the new development will engender the spirit of inclusiveness and mutual appreciation as well as highlighting regional comparative strength ad capabilities. Zimbabwe attained its independence in 1980, after a protracted liberation struggle. The Independence brought many benefits to the indigenous people who were deprived of means of production by successive colonial governments. Last year the nation commemorated its 41st Independence Day in accordance with Covid-19 prevention protocols. The majority of Zimbabweans followed the main programme at State House in Harare where President Mnangagwa presented his Independence Day speech, virtually while a few officials were in attendance. In provinces, Ministers of Provincial Affairs and Devolution and some delegates had to follow the proceedings from selected locations where there was observation of Covid-19 prevention protocols. Security chiefs, representatives from the business sector, religious leaders, politicians and other social groups participated in the hybrid Independence Day commemorations. In Bulawayo the commemorations were held at United College of Education as opposed to the White City Stadium where the celebrations are usually held. — @mashnets