The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Chronicle Reporter
A TOTAL of 140 000 youths are set to be trained and employed across Zimbabwe as Government plans to drill 70 000 boreholes in the rural areas that they will operate and maintain for the community. This was said yesterday by Zanu-PF national chairman Cde Oppah Muchinguri-Kashiri during a rally held at Mbalabala Business Centre.  The rally was to drum up support for Zanu-PF’s six council candidates in the province who are going into by elections to be held this Saturday. The six are Cde Silabaziso Nkala (Ward 20 Umzingwane), Cde Thembani Mathuthu (Ward 7, Gwanda), Cde Shepard Maphosa (Ward 20, Insiza) Cde Cassper Moyo (Ward 11 Insiza), Cde Showa Moyo and Cde Lawrence Tshili both from Beitbridge. Cde Muchinguri-Kashiri was greeted by a rapturous applause from fist-waving party supporters who cheered and ululated while chanting party slogans. Also present at the rally, held in Ward 20 Umzingwane district, were Zanu-PF Matabeleland South Provincial chairman Cde Mangaliso Ndlovu, Politburo member and Provincial Affairs and Devolution Minister Cde Abednico Ncube, Umzingwane MP Cde Levi Mayihlome, Politburo member Cde Richard Ndlovu, Gwanda Senator Cde Alma Mkwebu, Politburo member Cde Aaron Mathuthu and Beitbridge Senator Cde Tambudzani Mohadi among other high ranking party officials. Cde Muchinguri-Kashiri said youth are an integral part of Zimbabwe, hence Zanu-PF is working hard to include them more in the economy. “There are 70 000 boreholes that will be drilled around the country. The youth are going to be employed from these boreholes to maintain them. This means if there are 70 000 boreholes, two youths each borehole is going to be trained to repair and maintain them. This translates to 140 000 jobs for the youth for them to maintain these boreholes,” said Cde Muchinguri-Kashiri who is also Defence And War Veterans Affairs Minister. She said youths in the province must be helped to get gold claims and challenged Minister Ncube to help them do so, as they were the future of the country. “The youth are future leaders of the country. There is a bank for the youth and if they want it to come to the province, it can happen and you can talk to them to give you money for projects. In Matabeleland South there is a lot of gold, the mantra nyika inovakwa nevene vayo’ (a country is built by its own people). “It doesn’t mean foreigners must come and get claims in the area. Please, Minister Ncube, help the youth to get the gold claims in the province. Let them be the owners of the claims. These are the people who will vote for us and they are the future of the nation. We are now there to facilitate these opportunities,” said Cde Muchinguri-Kashiri. She said it was high time people voted out the opposition, describing its members as thugs as urban councils and other rural areas have been worn down at their behest. “In the urban areas, look at how bad they are because people voted in thugs. The roads are bad, littered with deep potholes, the sewer system and that water is flowing into rivers and dams, contaminating the water. This has given birth to diseases such as cholera. Please vote wisely, let’s vote for Zanu-PF, not these chaotic parties. “The roads, Government is now fixing, street lights the same water that was contaminated, we are the ones who are now fixing. Let us restore order in the towns and city, by voting for Zanu-PF,” she said.