The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter ZIMBABWE national cricket team fast bowler Blessing Muzarabani has revealed that he is joining new Indian Premier League (IPL) franchise Lucknow Super Giants as a net bowler. Muzarabani was earlier believed to be joining the team as English pacer Mark Wood’s replacement after the latter pulled out from the league due to injury. He has, however, broke his silence on all speculation surrounding his move to the IPL.  “To clarify for everyone from my real account, I’m joining Lucknow Super Giants on a training basis as part of my desire to continuously improve as a cricketer and be ready to step on to the big stage at the IPL should an opportunity arise. Can’t wait!” tweeted Muzarabani. Indian batsman KL Rahul is the Lucknow Super Giants captain, while other notable stars in the team are South African Quinton de Kock, Jason Holder from the West Indies and Australian Marcus Stoinis. Muzarabani did not attract any bid in the mega auction held in Bengaluru last month. He was hoping to become the fourth player from Zimbabwe to ever be bought by an IPL side after Tatenda Taibu, Ray Price and disgraced former skipper Brendan Taylor. In 2014, former Zimbabwe captain Brendan Taylor was signed by Sunrisers Hyderabad, but never got to play for the team as he opted to delay traveling to India because of his wedding. Sunrisers Hyderabad placed him on injury standby and he was never called up. Muzarabani is fresh from taking part in the Pakistan Premier League with Multan Sultan. The TATA Indian Premier League (IPL) 2022 resumes with the Chennai Super Kings taking on the Kolkata Knight Riders at the Wankhede Stadium on March 26th. This match will be a momentous occasion as the 15th edition of the IPL will welcome fans back to the stadia after a brief hiatus owing to the Covid-19 pandemic. Ardent cricket fans are all set to witness nail-biting matches, cheering for their favourite players at the most anticipated cricket tournament in the world. – @innocentskizoe