The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
BULAWAYO City will not be reading too much into public opinion that Caps United is an “Old People’s Home” when the two sides clash at Barbourfields Stadium this afternoon. The Green Machine have been termed in some circles as an old people’s home owing to the large number of what is seen to be old players in their squad. In their 6-0 thumping of Whawha last week, the Caps United squad even invented a celebration that was aimed at mocking those that have been mimicking them. The Green Machine had failed to win their last five matches in which they drew four and lost 6-2 to Manica Diamonds, but have seemingly got their campaign back on track with the victory over Whawha. Bulawayo City who also had a bad start to the league campaign have collected four points in their last two league games including a victory against Highlanders.  City coach Philani “Beefy” Ncube says those two results have given him an insight into areas they should improve . “People say Caps United is an “old people’s home” but well, this is a term from people who are not football people. As a coach I view Caps as a team that has experience. We do not need to worry about their age because that is their philosophy and what they want to do. We also want to have these old people but our focus is on juniors. “We are ready for them and we will throw everything at them. We are still in the process of assembling a strong team. During the process we also have to post good results. Our last two games have given us a picture of who we are and hopefully it is a starting point. For me there is no big game or small game. These games are all equally balanced,” said Ncube. Elsewhere, log leaders Chicken Inn will face Harare City in an away fixture at the National Sports Stadium this afternoon. Gamecocks sit on the apex of the log standings with 15 points, two ahead of second placed Manica Diamonds who are set to take on Triangle United at Sakubva Stadium. Bulawayo Chiefs will be hoping to end their winless run when they face ZPC Kariba at Nyamhunga Stadium this afternoon. Chiefs go into this one from a frustrating loss to Dynamos at Barbourfields Stadium. Ahead of their trip to Kariba, Chiefs coach Nilton Terreso said: “In terms of our preparations, of course it’s a little bit more difficult when you come from a disappointing run of results. So it’s about lifting the spirit and not only focusing on what we do wrong but also focusing on what we do right. As a team we haven’t been shocked by the results and we continue to work the way we have been doing. Week Seven PSL fixtures Saturday: ZPC Kariba v Bulawayo Chiefs (Nyamhunga Stadium), Harare City v Chicken Inn (National Sports Stadium), Black Rhinos v FC Platinum (Sakubva), Ngezi Platinum Stars v Cranborne Bullets (Baobab Stadium), Bulawayo City v CAPS United (Barbourfields Stadium) Sunday: Whawha v Yadah FC (Ascot Stadium), Manica Diamonds v Triangle United (Sakubva), Dynamos v Tenax (National Sports Stadium), Highlanders v Herentals (Barbourfields)
— @innocentskizoe