The Chronicle Thandeka Moyo-Ndlovu, Senior Reporter BULAWAYO City Council is set to implement the Local Authorities Digital Systems (LADS) which will see the financially constrained council improve revenue collection and service delivery. The system which was created locally has so far been adopted by about 30 councils including Mutare which after implementation has managed to collect 80 percent of its revenue from members of the public. Besides helping BCC collect revenue, the system will also allow council to monitor service delivery around the city and act on challenges way before residents complain. LADS will also give council the facility to register stands, track the waiting list and check the validity of leases via the WhatsApp platform. The system automatically raises the red flag on suspicious transactions and monitors orders bought, delivered, delayed and some that may have failed to come on time. Residents will also use the system to request for inspections during building projects to cut costs related to calling or reporting to council offices. Commenting on the development, Local Government and Public Works Minister July Moyo said BCC is set to benefit by adopting LADS. “Firstly, it is a home grown ICT developed by HIT and it has been applied to cities and Mutare is benefiting meaning BCC will save extra as they pay royalties for applications which were created outside Zimbabwe. LADS will greatly improve the billing, collection of revenue, water systems et cetera as council not rely on reports from residents to attend to problems related to service delivery,” he said.  “As Government we commend such moves because they are likely to bear fruits which will help us achieve Vision 2030. Residents will also benefit from the application as will easily engage with council on everything including their person construction projects.” Bulawayo is struggling to recover $2,1 billion owed by rate payers, while it owes creditors $1,8 billion. However, adoption of LADS could address the local authority’s shortcomings. The new system can help council improve management of housing applications and waiting lists, cemetery records, procurement processes, tracking management processes and service provisions in local authorities. Council corporate affairs manager Mrs Nesisa Mpofu had not responded to questions sent to her by time of going to press. Bulawayo secretary for provincial affairs and devolution Mr Paul Nyoni said consultations had been done and council had agreed to adopt the system. “We had been engaging the local authority on LADS and I am glad to say that they have finally agreed to adopt it. We now await the town clerk to give finer details, but I know that a team from council will be visiting Mutare to have an appreciation of LADS which I am confident will help this city retain its former glory,” he said. — @thamamoe