The Chronicle Patrick Chitumba, Midlands Bureau Chief
ZISCOSTEEL, which recently secured Kuvimba Mining House as a partner, is now working on a Water Reticulation Master Plan that will address perennial water crisis in Redcliff town. Redcliff town does not have its own source of water and as such relies on Kwekwe City Council.  Kwekwe City Council which is now owed $72,7 million by Redcliff Municipality, at times disconnects water supplies to force its neighbour to clear the debt. In a public notice published last Thursday, Ziscosteel invited applications from companies, individuals and consultants to carry out an integrated Water Reticulation Master Plan to cover both domestic and industrial water supply. According to the notice, Ziscosteel said the terms of reference will among other things analyse the reliability or sustainability of water supply from Kwekwe City Council, assess other possible water sources and related infrastructure to bring water to Zisco and Buchwa Iron Mining Company (Bimco) “Ziscosteel is an integrated iron and steel making operation which stopped production in 2008 and is currently seized with its own revival. Zisco has therefore, embarked on a programme to resuscitate its own iron and steel making operations and is looking for companies, individuals and consultants to carry out Water Reticulation Master Plan for Zisco, Bimco to cover both domestic and industrial water supply, analyse the reliability or sustainability of water supply from Kwekwe municipality and assess other possible water sources and related infrastructure to bring water to Zisco and Bimco,” reads part of the notice. Ziscosteel used to be the largest integrated steel plant in Africa producing more than one million tonnes of steel annually and employing more than 5 000 workers. It was one of the biggest employers in the Midlands province and supporting many downstream manufacturing industries. The bulk of Redcliff Municipality’s revenue was from Ziscosteel as most of the ratepayers were its employees. Several attempts to resuscitate the giant steel plant have hit a snag and recently Cabinet approved the selection of Kuvimba Mining House as a partner for the revival of Ziscosteel. Speaking to residents at a meeting recently, Redcliff Mayor Councillor Clayton Masiyatsva said the revenue his council was collecting was not enough to pay for the water it was getting from Kwekwe City Council hence the proposal to handover the administration of water to Kwekwe City Council. “The short-term goal is to install water meters in 2022 and our long-term goal is to have our own water treatment plant,” said Clr Masiyatsva. He said the revival of Ziscosteel was good news as plans were already under way to have an integrated Water Reticulation Master Plan to cover both domestic and industrial water supply.