The Chronicle Africa Moyo and Prosper Ndlovu in Dubai
ZIMBABWEAN companies and farmers have been encouraged to combine their capacities to boost output and secure adequate standard certification to be able to penetrate the United Arab Emirates (UAE). The oil-rich Arab economy is a net importer of food products and Zimbabwe stands a chance to reap more from export earnings by riding on the cordial bilateral relations between the two countries. In an interview, Zimbabwe Pavilion Expo 2020 Dubai Commissioner General Ambassador Mary Mubi said the UAE has a huge market for horticultural products hence the need to find a way of aggregating production to ensure local products match expectations from key buyers. Ambassador Mubi said that goats, honey and beef from Zimbabwe were also on high demand in the UAE, which presents a lucrative opportunity. “There is a fairly huge market for a number of our products here including horticulture, teas and honey. The Standards Association of Zimbabwe has to certify our products so that they can get a good price,” she said. Ambassador Mubi said the companies and farmers need to meet market requirements. “We will need all the time to study the market but our quality is excellent and even our beef is excellent,” she said. Zimbabwe is pushing the export agenda as it seeks to boost foreign currency generation to ensure the bulk of products that are not manufactured locally such as fuel, are readily available for the benefit of consumers. The Government is encouraging all producers to consider exporting part of their production to minimize, if not eliminate forex shortages.  Tobacco and the mining sectors continue to lead in terms of export earnings but experts have stressed the need  for value addition in order to earn more from exported products. Last year, Zimbabwe generated US$9,7 billion compared to US$6,2 billion it earned from exports in 2020. Ambassador Mubi said during the six months that Zimbabwe has been exhibiting in the Expo 2020 Dubai, there was also huge investor interest in committing funds into the various business opportunities available in the country. “Some investors enquired on investment in smart cities, mining, health, tourism, ICTs and transport. “There are a number of companies following up on their expressions of interest. We have already started to answer questions from potential investors. I hope many enquiries will continue after the expo as it has  has amplified our brand,” said Amb Mubi.