The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
NEWLY-APPOINTED Highlanders chief executive officer Ronald Moyo has given a brief insight into his plans as the club’s head of secretariat. Moyo was appointed as substantive CEO early this week after occupying the role in an acting capacity for the past six months. The highlanders’ executive committee said Moyo emerged as the best man for the job among those it interviewed. Those interviewed for the job include ex-Bosso defender Sikhumbuzo Ndebele, former Ingwebu marketing and sales manager Prosper Ncube, Pilate Mahlangu, Tongai Dodo, Nqobile Ngulube, Francis Mpofu and Raymond Gonte. Asked for his vision Moyo said: “If you notice the club is in a state of stability at the moment coming from a rough patch where we had no sponsorship. The immediate target for me is to nurture the sponsorship with Sakunda and Utande as well as the partnerships we have with the likes of Sanctuary, Nyaradzo and Arenel. “We have to think about our exit strategy from the stability that we have right now. We know we have a sponsorship that has a life span. It comes to an end in 2023 whether that sponsorship is renewed is not in our hands. We are not in control of that. We should now start looking at alternatives to say what is our next step after this from a financial perspective.” He said commercialisation of the club also tops his tasks during his tenure. “Highlanders have a collective vision. The long-term plan is to make sure that l mobilise people towards the same vision we have as a club, which is going beyond football and inspire generations. Going beyond football speaks to the commercialisation of the club. We are saying let’s think beyond football: we are more than just a football club.”  There are some sections of the club’s membership, which feels Moyo (32) is not ready for the job, but he feels he is in that role for a purpose. “I don’t believe in coincidences, l believe l am not here by chance, but everything happens for a reason and there are certain things that l should achieve with the club. We are an institution that has a great history, people from different epochs; generations have come and contributed to this great club. I believe l am here to represent a certain generation. “I believe this is an opportunity for me to stand for that generation, while also serving as a conduit between generations. If you look at the executive and the board, it’s a generation on its own if you are to look at them from a demographic perspective age wise. Then there is a generation that is coming up and l happen to be that conduit that links the generations and speak to the cultural hybridisation if you like to bring different cultures for the sustainability of this institution. I happen to be that link between the generations,” said Moyo. He expressed gratitude to the Highlanders’ chiefs for showing confidence in him. “Being given this opportunity means people have trust in you. I am in a situation where I am thinking I should celebrate or start thinking about the challenges and responsibilities ahead. We all know the magnitude of this institution. This is a very big institution with loads of challenges, demands and expectations. That on its own sometimes becomes a burden, but nonetheless this is a responsibility l applied for, which means l have the capability and ability to do the job. “Not to say l have the capacity to carry the team alone, but this is a cultured club. It’s an institution where you have lots of pillars for support. You have your board, executive, members and the fans. That is where the bravery to say l am not in this alone comes from,” Moyo said. — @innocentskizoe