The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
BULAWAYO Chiefs coach Nilton Terroso believes only hard work and determination will see them turn around their results in the Castle Lager Premier Soccer league.  Since their 2-0 victory over FC Platinum when league action resumed this year, Amakhosi have gone four games without victory, managing two stalemates and two defeats. They face Harare City tomorrow at Luveve Stadium hoping to bounce back to winning ways. “The points are a concern, no one is happy when you drop points. But we have to know how to manage those sorts of things emotionally. We have to channel that frustration to get results. Off-course we want to get the results but this is about the process and the team that we are trying to build. “The players are still adapting to me and my methods. Change brings difficulty. Hard work and determination and commitment to what we are doing will help transform the results. We have to believe in ourselves and what we are doing,” said Terroso. Chiefs will be missing the services of Perfect Chikwende and Obriel Chirinda who are suspended. Sipho Ndlovu is also out injured. Terrosso said they had played their best game this year in last weekend’s nil all draw against ZPC Kariba and they will be hoping to build from that display. “There are areas we have identified that we need to improve on and we have done that during the course of the week. In all honesty l felt we had our best performance in Kariba. We were able to put more things together in terms of continuity and how we want to play.” Meanwhile, log leaders Manica Diamonds will face newboys Cranborne Bullets at Baobab Stadium hoping to maintain their grip on top of the table. Second-placed Chicken Inn welcomes army side Black Rhinos at Luveve Stadium this hoping. Three-time PSL champions FC Platinum have a date with fellow miners Ngezi Platinum Stars at Mandava Stadium while Dynamos entertain unpredictable ZPC Kariba at the National Sports Stadium. Week Eight Fixtures Today: Chicken Inn vs Black Rhinos, (Luveve Stadium), Yadah vs Bulawayo (Baobab), FC Platinum vs Ngezi Platinum (Mandava Stadium), Dynamos vs ZPC Kariba (National Sports Stadium). Tomorrow: Caps United vs Highlanders (National Sports Stadium), Tenax vs Herentals (Sakubva Stadium), Bulawayo Chiefs vs Harare City (Luveve Stadium), Triangle United vs Whawha (Gibbo Stadium), Cranborne Bullets vs Manica Diamonds (Baobab Stadium).