The Chronicle Lumbidzani Dima, Chronicle Reporter
AMID water shortage in Dete, Matabeleland North that has been worsened by a poor rainfall season, Gogo Margarete Ncube said she is living by the grace of God. Dete is supplied by the Zimbabwe National Water Authority (Zinwa) and sometimes goes for up to a month without the precious liquid. Gogo Ncube said the water problem has been worsened by erratic rains, which brings food shortages as well.  She said they cannot plant anything in their garden as they used to do back in the day. “We have dry gardens in our yards; no planted vegetables or crops. We used to plant green veggies for relish and all was well, but nowadays we are the poorest. The truth is we are just living by the grace of God,” she said. Her old age is worsening her plight as she is unable to fetch water.  “We’ve been facing this water crisis for years and it’s a burden for someone my age. When others go and get water from any school or wherever the water tank vehicles will be parked, I usually come back with my two five litre bottles empty because I cannot run or walk faster. I do not get the water. Without water there is no life, so I can say that we have no life in this place, especially the elderly like me. At least there are some who think of me and give me some from their buckets,” said Gogo Ncube. She said the water situation is adding to the burden that she already has with her home made of pole and dagga. “We already have problems with our old houses, plus this water crisis, it means there is no peace of mind for me. I can’t even renovate, re-roof or do something to my house, I do not have the power or capacity. I wish the Government could intervene and do something for us,” said Gogo Ncube who lives with her two grandchildren who are in primary school. Dete ward 8 councillor, Stanley Torima said Dete is facing serious water challenges. “We have a serious water crisis in our area. Apart from Zinwa being the sole supplier of water, we have no other source of water, of which supply from the authority is not consistent. At times we go into three good weeks or a full month without water. That means that our local clinics and schools will be affected in a manner that forces them to close at times. Once there is no power, we have no water because the systems are interconnected. The boreholes are not functional, only four sustain the town as a whole. In most cases clinics get water from nearby lodges because there are some cases such as maternity that need a lot of water,” he said. He said the oldest areas of Dete have houses made of dagga and pole, where most of the elderly live. The councillor said some of the structures collapse due to weather elements. “The oldest section in the community comprises houses made of dagga and pole. They are occupied by elderly people, and most of them are foreign nationals. During the rainy season the structures collapse and the surviving ones are not strong enough to keep the water outside; there are leakages and all,” he said. Cllr Torima appealed to Government to assist to end the water crisis. “If they can just drill us more boreholes, the better. When there is no rain, we usually have drought in this area,” he said. Those who may want to help Gogo Ncube can get in touch with her through the Cllr Torima on 0772509874.