The Chronicle Showbiz Reporter
It is exactly one month before Africa’s most exhilarating music and adventure festival, the Victoria Falls Carnival returns after a two-year hiatus owing to the Covid-19 pandemic. The event that was traditionally held as a New Year’s bash is celebrating its 10th anniversary this year and will be held from April 29 to May 1 at one of the Seven Wonders of the World. To ensure that locals are part of the experience, organisers have given Victoria Falls residents VIP treatment by offering them discounted tickets. In a statement, the organisers said this was being done to appreciate the host city’s community for                                   their unwavering support over the years. “To thank our locals for their continued support over the past 10 years, we are offering all locals a discounted ticket price. We thank you and we love you!” To buy the tickets that are being sold in the city centre, organisers said Victoria Falls residents will have to supply their IDs and proof of address to show that they are Victoria Falls residents. This means locals will buy tickets for US$65 for a three-day pass and US$30 for a single-day pass. However, organisers said these tickets are limited so those interested in attending the renowned event need to do so hurriedly before the tickets run out. Soon after the carnival’s inception, most locals complained of being side-lined as they felt that the ticket pricing was too steep and way out of their reach. At one point, locals were disheartened when superstar, Oliver Mtukudzi, now late, was playing as they could not see him after being charged US$50 to watch him in action.  Most left the venue’s entry points dejected as negotiations to have the ticket prices reduced proved fruitless. However, taking heed of the locals’ complaints, organisers, three years back, arranged to give locals a 20 percent discount on tickets, a move that was hailed by many. Meanwhile, event organisers have called on those attending the event to dress for the occasion as this year is no ordinary event. “Exactly four weeks to go until we shake our tail feathers at our 10th edition Carnival! Ten years of VFC! This means big celebrations are in order and more than ever, we really want people to dress up and bring that carnival vibe!” And indeed, this year’s event that is making a return after two years will be a unique one. Besides the star-studded lineup, the event has a new home in the form of Elephant Hills moving from Victoria Falls Farm School. Organisers said dates for the event were carefully chosen as they opted for the long weekend. “This year’s carnival is a must-attend as we will be celebrating 10 years. There’s everything from adrenalin-pumping adventure activities, an incredible landmark setting, and a music-loving crowd, all mixed with local and international music fans celebrating an artiste lineup that showcases the best talent from around the African continent,” festival director Craig Bright said. Artistes billed to perform include DJ Maphorisa, Kabza De Small, Boity, Nutty O, Sha Sha, Master KG, Shimza, DJ La Timmy, King Her, DJ Colastraw, Flying Bantu, Nitefreak and Tashinga.