The Chronicle Mashudu Netsianda, Senior Reporter POLITICAL parties in Bulawayo conducted their campaigns peacefully with no incidents of violence ahead of today’s by-elections. The Zimbabwe Electoral Commission (Zec) has already announced that it is ready to conduct by-elections and urged voters to adhere to Covid-19 regulations at all polling stations around the country. Zimbabweans are voting to elect 117 councillors and 28 Members of Parliament to replace those who died, were recalled or redeployed. Bulawayo will have by-elections for two MPs in Nkulumane and Pumula and polling stations are in Wards 17, 19, 20, 22, 23 and 27. Most of the polling stations are at both primary and secondary schools as well as tents, community halls and churches.. For the Local Government seats there are 114 polling stations for the eight wards up for grabs. The wards are, 8, 9, 12, 18, 19, 20, 21 and 26. Sixteen political parties are contesting the by-elections and the ruling party Zanu-PF, MDC Alliance and Citizens’ Coalition for Change are contesting almost all the 28 National Assembly seats and council wards. Bulawayo Provincial Affairs and Devolution Minister Judith Ncube said campaigns were peaceful. “I am happy to say that we had peaceful campaigns in our metropolitan province ahead of tomorrow’s by-elections. There were no incidents of violence and we are looking forward to having peaceful polls as people vote tomorrow,” she said. Polling stations open at 7AM and close at 7PM.  Voters should carry identity documents such as national IDs or a valid passport, wear face masks and practice social distancing when going to vote. Zec spokesperson Commissioner Jasper Mangwana said all was set for the by-elections and they had roped in the Red Cross to assist with the temperature checks. He said no one will be denied the right to vote even if they have high temperature, adding that there was no requirement to bring vaccination cards. Commissioner Mangwana said vote counting will start as soon as polling stations close. Home Affairs and Cultural Heritage Minister Kazembe Kazembe said those who engage in violence will face the full wrath of the law. He assured the nation that there will be adequate security to ensure peaceful elections. — @mashnets