The Chronicle Michael Magoronga, Midlands Correspondent
AS the world continues its fight against gender-based violence (GBV) and empowerment of women, Zimbabwe has not been left behind as it has recorded notable success in that regard. As Zimbabwe remains in the mood of commemorating International Women’s Day, which falls on March 8 yearly, it is important to highlight some success stories that the country has recorded since the beginning of the fight.  Besides GBV, rights groups are advocating for equal rights and opportunities for both women and men where no duty or job will be reserved for a particular gender. Kwekwe City Council has become an embodiment of women empowerment given the number of ladies who occupy top management positions which are usually regarded as manly. In the spirit of breaking the bias, the city has seen three of the top five management positions within the local authority being occupied by women. Dr Lucia Mkandla is the Town Clerk albeit in an acting capacity, a position she has held since 2017 after the retirement of Mr Emmanuel Musara. Dr Mkandla has been credited with ensuring continuous supply of clean water not only to Kwekwe City residents but also those of Redcliff Municipality. She has also been largely credited with bringing back Kwekwe to being one of the smartest cities in Zimbabwe through extensive cleaning programmes in the city. Mrs Rejoice Dandira is the city’s Director of Finance while the Acting Director of Health is Sister Patricia Shumba to complete the list of women in top management. Eng John Mhike (Director of Works) and Mr Edson Chiyangwa (Director of Housing) complete the top five senior positions.
So successful is the city in this regard that it has also seen a number of women occupying deputy director positions. As if that is not enough the city broke barriers when it elected Councillor Angeline Kasipo as its first female mayor becoming one of the few cities to do so in the country. Kasipo, who was later ousted, has since been replaced by yet another woman, Cllr Future Titora. Besides occupying top positions, female workers are also given equal opportunities in various departments within the local authority, a feat that many local authorities have been failing to achieve. In an interview, Cllr Titora said everyone, including men, are given equal opportunities but women tend to excel. “We are very proud as Kwekwe City that we have set the standard by employing as many women as possible which is in line with gender equality. We however do not give any special attention to the women but they go through the same processes as men and they excel, they are not employed simply because they are women,” she explained. Cllr Titora said she has not faced any challenges in carrying out her duties. “I have no challenges whatsoever as all male and female councillors respect me in the same manner. In fact, it is mutual respect because we respect each other and that makes the job even easier,” she said. Mrs Ruramai Marimira is the city’s Assistant City Planner who joined the local authority in 2006. Married to Kenneth Marimira who is based in Somalia, Mrs Marimira is left with the task of taking care of their three children, their pre-school and lodge businesses. She explains how she balances this given the challenging task which also awaits her at work. “I think as women we are also blessed with a talent called time management. I wake up at 5AM everyday so that I can prepare the kids for school. I go out at once with them then drop them at school and I head straight to the pre-school. “During lunch I also make sure I visit the lodge,” she explained. She said gone are the days when she used to face gender related challenges at her work station. “During the first days I used to face challenges but nowadays people are now aware of the need to have women in positions of authority, which makes the job easier,” she said. Engineer Rejoice Chimhamhiwa (30) said at first, she faced resistance from older men who regarded themselves as more experienced. “I joined Kwekwe City only two years back and given my age, it was difficult for me to delegate duties to some men who regard themselves more experienced than me. But I had to take measures and stand up for myself, take necessary steps to ensure that the job is done. I would report the cases to the authorities and they would be dealt with. It made them realise that I meant business. Now it’s easy to work with everyone,” said Eng Chimhamhiwa. Getrude Sibanda who is a driver under the Municipal Police Department, said she works well with her male counterparts, but the community gives her challenges. “My workmates actually stand up for me whenever we are in the field. Whenever we are driving around, some drivers and touts can hurl insults and hate language towards me and my work colleagues stand up for me,” she explained. Her job involves going after touts who are known for foul mouths. “During the first days they would say whatever they want and it used to affect me but now I am used to it. I feel good maintaining order and council by-laws in the city. It’s quite a difficult job but as a trained person and with the backing of my workmates, we enjoy it, the job is made easier for me,” she explained, adding she was now aiming at attaining a Class 2 driver’s licence so that she can start driving trucks. Msasa Advocacy and Communications Officer, Mrs Rotina Mafume said in a statement to mark International Women’s Day, that her organisation continues to celebrate women achievements in all spheres of life from business, jobs, home, science and any other aspect. She however said cases of GBV were affecting women participation. “GBV affects women’s participation and limits women’s participation in the economic development of the country. We therefore continue imploring the Government to come up with policies that advance the rights of women in Zimbabwe,” she said. She said whilst the achievements in so far as women’s rights are concerned are commendable there is room for more to be done. — @michaelmagoron1