The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
ZIFA Referees’ Committee acting chairman Brighton Mudzamiri has revealed that Fifa had been in constant communication with the national association’s executive committee member and chairperson of the referees’ committee Bryton Malandule before Zimbabwe’s suspension from international football last month. Malandule and the entire Zifa board were suspended by the Sports and Recreation Commission in November last year for flagrant violation of national laws.  Mudzamiri revealed this in a referees’ WhatsApp group after being asked why he was always consulting Malandule on referees’ issues despite knowing that he was on suspension. Mudzamiri’s message directed to Malandule reads: “Good evening chairman, hope you are fine. Finally, the refs’ badges are with me, but Fifa made a mistake, they sent us IDs for Zambian referees so kindly send an email to Fifa advising them of this anomaly. I will give the badges to SG (secretary-general) for distribution. On the kit the office is still awaiting Zimra to authorise release of the equipment.” Mudzamiri sought to clear the air yesterday, saying he sent the message well before Zimbabwe was suspended by Fifa, as all correspondence regarding referees was directed to Malandule. “Let me set the record straight here. Before Zimbabwe’s suspension, Fifa recognised him as the head of referees in Zimbabwe and all correspondence pertaining to referees were sent to him, and because here he was suspended, he would then forward the mail from Fifa to me,” said Mudzamiri. He said after collecting the referees’ equipment, they discovered the mix-up of the goods, but it was impossible for him to engage Fifa since its point man here was Malandule. “After collection of the equipment, it was discovered that identity cards for our referees were sent to Zambia and Zambian referees’ identity cards were sent to Zimbabwe. I could not communicate with Fifa and had to do so through him because Fifa wanted to know if the badges and IDs had been received. Further to that, Fifa also sent Malandule a letter advising him that further referees’ equipment (track suits) and uniforms would be dispatched to Zimbabwe on March 3. Unfortunately, Zimbabwe got suspended before the dispatch of those uniforms,” Mudzamiri said.