The Chronicle Mbulelo Mpofu, Showbiz Reporter
With people preparing to celebrate Zimbabwe’s 42nd birthday on April 18, Ndabaningi Sithole’s book, African Nationalism is set to relaunch on the day. The third edition of African Nationalism, the seminal book written by the late Sithole is set to be released on Independence Day. The book discusses Sithole’s own career as well as other issues.  The book was first published in 1959 and was republished in 1968 while he was imprisoned by the Rhodesian government. African Nationalism inspired an entire generation of liberation fighters in the 1960s and 1970s both in and outside of Zimbabwe to fight for their freedom and is required reading in many African history courses globally, today.  In his review of the book, President Mnangagwa states that: “The book provides an indubitable contribution to the understanding of nationalism, the theory and practice of politics and the ideological parameters for Africa. The publication of the book was a timely intervention not only in the African political discourse, but to the intellectual tradition, as well as it is today.” Former Prime Minister of Kenya Raila Odinga, affirms that: “In the 21st Century and with Africa agreed to be rising, this book must be a source of reflection on how we use experiences and expectations of the past to shape Africa’s future, to ensure Africa uses its new status to cement its place indelibly as an equal member of the community of nations in this century and beyond.” According to Retired Bishop Chad Gandiya, chairperson of the Ndabaningi Sithole Foundation which is the publisher of the book, African Nationalism represents the first of Sithole’s 12 books that the foundation is set to republish over the next few years. “African Nationalism is an important body of work for Zimbabweans and Africans to read, especially the younger generations, as it contextualises the difficult journey that Africa faced to get its independence, which helps us appreciate the work that still needs to be done to get to where Africa logically should be by now.” The book shall be available on Amazon.com and in bookshops in Zimbabwe from April 18. Sithole, a former teacher was born on July 21, 1920, and died on December 12, 2000, after actively participating in the liberation struggle. – @eMKlass_49