The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter 
BULAWAYO deputy mayor Mlandu Ncube has bemoaned the demise from top-flight league, of one of the oldest football clubs in the country, Zimbabwe Saints, and called on the club’s remaining elders to take a leading position in making sure it is fully revived.  Ncube was speaking during a funeral service for the late former Zimbabwe Saints forward Aubrey Sauramba at Ntabazinduna Flats in Mzilikazi on Thursday ahead of the burial at Lady Stanley Cemetery on the same day. Sauramba succumbed to a short illness on Sunday, just 11 days after he celebrated his 53rd birthday. Bulawayo’s second citizen said as the leadership, their wish was to see Chauya Chikwata fully revived and playing in the biggest league in the country which in turn will help push brand Bulawayo. “When you speak about sport in the country, Bulawayo is well known in that regard, its sons and daughters have illuminated not only the local sporting arenas but even beyond our borders and indeed our continental borders,” said Ncube. He said football breeds unity in societies, regardless of temporary differences during competitions hence their wish to see Zimbabwe Saints fully revived. “Our wish as the Bulawayo leadership is for Zimbabwe Saints to be revived and so to the Chikwata family, especially to the elders, I challenge you to make sure this once great club is revived,” said Ncube. Chauya Chikwata now plays in the Zifa Southern Region Division One League after being expelled in 2014 for non-payment of affiliation fees. The 1988 Super League winners where they went for an incredible 23 games without tasting defeat under Roy Barreto, have been relegated twice since the formation of the Premier Soccer League, first in 2004 where they ended the season rooted at the bottom of the standings with just two wins and 13 points, 66 points behind league champions then, Caps United. They spent only a single season in the second-tier league only to make a hasty return in 2007 following their relegation from the PSL in 2006. In that year they again registered just two wins and managed to get 17 points, 48 points behind their City rivals Highlanders who were crowned kings of local football in that year. Zimbabwe Saints stayed in the doldrums until 2010 when club elders decided to purchase the Eagles franchise ahead of the 2011 season kickoff but again, they were not good enough for the big boys’ league, bidding farewell at the end of that season with five wins and 28 points.