The Chronicle Sukulwenkosi Dube-Matutu, Chronicle Reporter
SCHOOLS and tertiary institutions have been urged to incorporate drug and substance abuse mitigation in their curricula as the country steps up efforts to curtail rampant drug abuse. President Mnangagwa recently appointed an inter-ministerial taskforce committee chaired by the Ministry of Public Service, Labour and Social Welfare to coordinate drug and substance abuse interventions across the country. A National Drug Abuse Fund has been set aside to help fight the scourge that has affected the country, especially among the youth. The fund, which is provided in this year’s budget, is meant to among other things establish rehabilitation centres for addicts and also help combat and contain drug and substance abuse.  Zimbabwe is working towards a drug free society through a drug master plan which will help the country achieve Vision 2030. The Zimbabwe National Drug Master Plan (2020- 2025) offers an integrated and comprehensive approach that will address a range of drug related issues. Schools and tertiary institutions have been identified among the hotspots for drugs. In an interview, acting director for social development in the Ministry of Public Service, Labour and Social Welfare, Mr Tawanda Zimhunga said there was need for school authorities to increase surveillance within their institutions. He said vendors that sell foodstuffs to learners also had to be monitored. “Schools and tertiary institutions have become a selling point for drugs hence the need for authorities to be proactive. School authorities should ensure that they try to end the supply of drugs in their institutions through surveillance. They should also work on reducing demand through raising awareness and education. The recommendation is that all educational institutions should have drug and substance abuse mitigation as part of the curricula,” he said. Mr Zimhunga added: “Vendors who sell foodstuffs to learners by the school gates should also be monitored as some of them sell food that is laced with drugs which in turn causes addiction among learners.” He said school authorities had to prioritise educating youngsters on drug abuse and its effects to an extent where learners hasten to report any drug related activities they see within institutions. Mr Zimhunga said drug and substance abuse was rampant in urban areas and it was slowly gaining momentum in rural areas.
He said a multi-sectoral approach was required to address the problem. Mr Zimhunga urged members of the public to be whistle blowers and report activities of drug lords. He said in most cases communities knew where drugs were being sold, but they choose to remain quiet. He said it was the duty of every citizen to protect these youngsters whose future was being destroyed by the use of drugs. “The problem is drug abuse is escalating throughout the country and this is greatly affecting the development of the economy. This problem is most rampant among the youth, but it’s also affecting adults. Against this background Government has directed 65 that all efforts must be made in order to address the supply of drugs,” said Mr zimhunga He added: “We can’t run away from the fact that we already have people who are already addicted to drugs. Our focus is to ensure that we treat and rehabilitate those who are using the drugs so they can go to society and live a normal life. Once they go back to the community we have to offer them psychosocial support.” – @DubeMatutu