The Chronicle Mbulelo Mpofu, Showbiz Reporter
BUDDING poet and performer, Kwanele Khumalo says being nominated for the 20th National Arts Merit Awards (Nama) certified him as a true writer. Khumalo came short in the Outstanding poetry book category for his Who killed Grandfather? anthology as he lost out to Batsirai Chigama. He said such a recognition was enough for him to see that he is headed for great things. Speaking to Chronicle Showbiz, he said the Nama nomination was like an answered prayer. “Nama brought an answer that I needed for my book, just by the nomination. It motivated me a lot and made me realise that I’m a true writer among other creatives. “Irrespective of me not winning the award, the nomination itself was a win. It was the first time that my work was nationally recognised and I will use this as a springboard to greater heights in my career,” said Khumalo. The 48-poem Who killed Grandfather? anthology has a mixture of themes that range from love, war, culture and everyday social issues. Mntungwa kaMbulazi, as Khumalo is known originally comes from the border town of Plumtree but was born in Filabusi, 25 years ago. He is based in Bulawayo.  He started writing poems in 2016 but faced financial problems to publish them until a friend, Stanley Mushava, owner of a publishing company called Underclass books and films helped him. Who killed Grandfather? was published last year and gained widespread fame as it penetrated the South African, Botswana and Kenyan markets. Khumalo said he usually writes his poems in IsiNdebele and then translates most of them to English. He also said that he does not perform much, but rather, he works hand in glove with Prosperity Mpofu, a poetess in South Africa who performs his poems. On challenges he faces, Khumalo said selling poetry is not easy as one has to have a unique selling point and “show people that my work is worth their time and money.” After his debut anthology, Khumalo is already working on a new project. “Nama also became my closing chapter for Who killed Grandfather? as I’ve started working on my next project titled A Hammer with a Broken Handle. Nama showed me that anything is possible and that is the very reason why I’ve taken the decision to be a full-time writer in the future,” said Khumalo. Khumalo is doing journalism internship with Zimpapers tabloid, B-Metro. – @eMKlass_49