The Chronicle Thupeyo Muleya, Beitbridge Bureau
THE New Dispensation has issued broadcasting licences to 14 community radio stations countrywide as part of its thrust to create special-purpose vehicles which push developmental matters from the grassroots level in line with the devolution concept.  This was said by the Information, Publicity and Broadcasting Services Deputy Minister Kindness Paradza during a familiarisation visit at the Beitbridge Shashe Community Radio station yesterday. He said the move would also help address issues of communication and underdevelopment in some parts of the country. “It is also very critical that these radios amass as much content as possible so that they may broadcast meaningful and helpful programmes for people in the respective area of jurisdiction,” he said. Deputy Minister Paradza said most communities, especially those living in border areas had endured decades of poor radio and television reception. “These licences are language-based and the idea is to make sure that we leave no area or anyone behind as we drift towards attaining the envisaged Vision 2030,” he said. “Currently, as a ministry, we are on the ground to inspect progress on all these community radio and television stations that were given licences. As you are aware, the Government has issued 14 licences to community radios stations and these are dotted around borderline areas and those used to be marginalised communities.” The Deputy Minister said so far, he has visited stations in Mashonaland Central and was now covering Matabeleland South and Matabeleland North. He said Matabeleland South had been fortunate enough to get four licences for a Venda, Sotho, Kalanga, and Ndebele community radio stations. “This is a phase, we have started as a ministry to make sure that we encourage these radio stations to set up, and according to our laws, they have 18 months to do so. However, the time is almost lapsing, so it’s because of these deadlines that the Minister (Mutsvangwa) has said go and see on location what is happening and what are the challenges,” said the Deputy Minister. He said out of 14 licensed community radio stations only the one in Chiredzi was fully operational while others were at various stages of setting up. Deputy Minister Paradza said most community radio initiatives were facing challenges with studio equipment and infrastructure. In some instances, he said some of those who were licensed were not aware of the 18 months deadline for them to go on air. “To ease that burden the Government has given them the green light to outsource equipment for businesses and their sons and daughters in the diaspora and originally from those areas. “Further to that once they become operational, they are now allowed to solicit for adverts, which is an alternative revenue stream to enhance sustainability,” he added. The official said they were confident that most of the radio stations will go on air soon and that they will cover a radius of 40km. Where the need is, some repeaters (transmitters), will be installed at convenient mobile telecommunications boosters to ensure that there was total coverage. Chairman of the Beitbridge Shashe Community Radio initiative, Mr Mekia Muyambo said they had already identified a possible studio at a building in the CBD and that they expect to complete renovating by the end of June this year. “We are expected to go on air by 7 December and we are working hard to make sure we have our house in order by that time,” he said.