The Chronicle Leonard Ncube in Victoria Falls
SOUTHERN African countries, Zimbabwe included, need to urgently come up with measures to address unethical recruitment where people are promised fake jobs and end up being exploited. The International Organisation for Migration (IOM), working in conjunction with the Africa Regional Migration Programme, Southern African Migration Management, United Nations, European Union, United States and Government of Zimbabwe organised the Regional Capacity Development Initiative on Ethical Recruitment in Southern Africa workshop, which opened in Victoria Falls yesterday to discuss about ways of fighting unethical recruitment and how to deal with unscrupulous employment agents that knowingly expose people to exploitation in the name of greener pastures. Matabeleland North Provincial Affairs and Devolution Minister Richard Moyo officiated at the opening ceremony where he said it is important to capacitate the country to deal with migrant labour issues. Chief director in the Ministry of Public Service, Labour and Social Welfare Mr Clifford Matorera said Zimbabwe had managed to address some of the issues. “Migration is affecting all countries in Sadc and no country can do without migration, so we need Sadc to come up with measures for addressing unethical procedures that happen in countries. “We are here to find out how we can address unethical recruitment in Sadc region because it’s quite rampant to say the least. In Zimbabwe we had a number of people who were stuck in Oman and Kuwait under dubious circumstances after being promised better paying jobs.  There are locals working with these dubious recruitment agents and as a country we have managed to nab some of these locals and the law has taken its course,” said Mr Matorera. IOM regional manager Mr Sylvester Deane said unethical recruitment leads to exploitation and violence against those trafficked to unknown destinations. “The workshop is on how to promote fair and ethical recruitment on labour in the Sadc region where citizens migrate, especially to Middle East and West Africa through some agents. Yes, private recruitment agencies are key in labour exports but should know their role. If we have ethical recruitment, no worker will be exploited,” he said. He urged Sadc states to domesticate regional labour conventions and use bilateral agreements to fight exploitation of citizens in the name of better paying jobs. With regards to acts of xenophobia and ill-treatment of migrant workers in foreign countries, Mr Deane said IOM position is very clear that countries should adhere to best practice to prevent ill-treatment. Most of the Sadc member states are attending the meeting which ends on Friday. Speaking during discussions, delegates said there is a significant increase in the number of migrant workers, both skilled and unskilled and this has remained a key policy concern due to the unscrupulous recruiters. This has led to an increase in exploitation hence the need to protect workers rights. Labour migration can contribute to the economic growth of countries of origin if well managed. – @ncubeleon