The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
SOUTH AFRICA-based former Highlanders and Caps United forward Gabriel Nyoni has added his voice to the shocking revelation by Bulawayo City coach Philani Beefy Ncube that drug abuse among Zimbabwean footballers was at an alarmingly high level. Not mentioning the team he was referring to, Nyoni who was nicknamed Granvia during his days at the Bulawayo giants, said they used to lose some matches because as many as five players were always under the influence of drugs, especially Broncleer. He called on authorities to make drug testing compulsory. Nyoni took to his Twitter handle to express his view on the clearly contentious issue which is likely to shake local football. “Its sad that we used to lose certain matches because certain players were high on broncleer. Coaches gave tactics and instructions the whole week. On the day of the game five players are high on Broncleer. Reaction slow, co-ordination none.  Clubs should make drug testing compulsory,” said Nyoni who spent more time at Highlanders than he did at Makepekepe which gives a bit of a hint which club he might be talking about. Nyoni’s call for mandatory doping test for all clubs may however, hit a snag due to the prohibitive costs involved. Zimbabwe Olympic Committee medical commissioner and Warriors doctor Nick Munyonga told Chronicle Sport that a single doping test costs in the region of US$500. Ncube on Thursday brewed a shocker when he said 80 percent of local football players were taking illicit drugs and specifically said one Bosso player was on drugs when the two teams met two weeks ago. “I can tell you that almost 80 percent of Zimbabwean players are on drugs. I will not mention names but when we played Highlanders there was a player from their end who was clearly under the influence. He was just sleeping. I know for a fact that he takes drugs. Then you hear people saying the coach must go,” Ncube told members of the media during a Press conference.