The Chronicle Sikhulekelani Moyo, Business Reporter
THE Zimbabwe Institute of Foundries (ZIF) is engaged in talks with Zambian counterparts in a bid to promote growth of the foundry industry in Southern Africa. This comes after Zimbabwe recently held a metal casting and engineering summit, which brought foreign representatives from United Kingdom and South Africa as well as Zimbabweans based in the diaspora. In an interview yesterday, ZIF chief operations officer, Mr Dosman Mangisi, said partnership with Zambian counterparts was ideal towards improving productivity in the two States, as well as the entire African continent. “We need to find one another as a regional block because other bigger economies have clusters. So, our integration is to start at regional level to open up business and help other economies in the region to grow,” he said. Mr Mangisi said Zimbabwe stands a huge chance to drive the metal industry revival, which is critical in unlocking higher mining sector proceeds as well as domestic provision of raw materials. The growth of the foundry industry in Southern African region, he said, will attract a lot of investments from big economies like China and India who are major trading partners with Africa.  “This synergy with other regional countries will open up business and help in import substitution and also on the issue of advanced technologies where Zimbabwe and South African stand a chance to help grow other economies in the Sadc,” said Mr Mangisi. “South Africa is advanced in technology and Zimbabwe has higher input in terms of raw material. “This very same thing will help attract a lot of investment from big economies like China, America, Britain and India to come and invest within because we are now protecting our own market and we are saying let people have an appreciation. “We will then integrate to other parts of Africa because countries like Sierra Leone and Liberia have a lot of iron ore activities.” Mr Mangisi said policy makers and the business community should work together to create a roadmap that will drive higher metal industry value addition. “We are there to demonstrate our capacity as we want to reclaim the glory at regional level and at the continent as Zisco steel was once the supplier of metal products,” he said. “We want to strike the iron while it’s still hot as we are now engaging with the diasporas to make sure that we put in the road map.” During the summit, South African Institute of Foundrymen president, Mr Glen Dikgale, said the biggest challenge in metal casting industry is that companies and associations prefer to work in silos. “This can be one of the reasons there is lack of industry growth as we don’t share expertise,” said Mr Dikgale. — @SikhulekelaniM1