The Chronicle NOVAK Djokovic’s rumoured new coach believes Roger Federer will never win a Grand Slam again. Patrick Mouratoglou is widely expected to take on the role as the world No1’s trainer.  Djokovic split with long-term coach and mentor Marian Vajda earlier this month – but kept Goran Ivanisevic on his staff. And amid speculation Mouratoglou will take on the role, he has fired his honest prediction at Federer amid his injury woes and ageing body. The Frenchman – who also coaches Serena Williams and Stefanos Tsitsipas and runs a tennis academy in France – said: “The last Grand Slam title won by Roger Federer dates back to 2018. “He has only played three majors in the past two seasons and has already announced that he will not attend Wimbledon this year. “I see it hard that he can increase his Grand Slam tally.” Federer lifted back-to-back Australian Open crowns in 2017 and 2018, sandwiching his eighth Wimbledon title, after making a miraculous return from knee surgery. He then came within a point of his 21st major at Wimbledon in 2019, but fell agonisingly short after failing to convert two match points in a five-set epic against Djokovic. However, the world No26 has featured at just two Grand Slams since the Australian Open in 2020 and played 13 matches in the whole of 2021, winning nine. At the French Open last year, Fed withdrew before the fourth round and at Wimbledon he was outplayed by Hubert Hurkacz in straight sets, losing the third 6-0. He underwent a third knee surgery within 18 months after the SW19 exit and is still in rehab. The Swiss legend, who turns 41 this August and has played at every Wimbledon since 1999, has all, but confirmed he will miss Wimbledon this year by revealing he aims to make his return to the court in “late summer or early autumn”. Many expect him to be wheeled out for the Laver Cup at London’s O2 Arena in September where he could compete for the final time and hang up his racket. Assuming, therefore, he does not add to his tally, Federer would finish on 20 Grand Slam titles. That is currently joint-second with Djokovic on the all-time men’s list and one behind Rafa Nadal, who made a stunning recovery from foot surgery to win the Australian Open this January. Djokovic was unable to defend his Melbourne crown because his visa was ripped up and he was deported. But he looks set to compete at Roland Garros and Wimbledon with restrictions loosened for unvaccinated players. And with 13-time French Open champ Nadal recovering from a fractured rib, the Serb will be confident of landing at least one, if not both, to increase his tally. – The Sun