The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
HARRY Allen Golf Club will host a charity golf day on Saturday to raise awareness for children living with hydrocephalus and fundraise for the Hydrocephalus Association projects.  The projects include building a school and clinic in Bulawayo’s Nkulumane 12 suburb. A member of the association that has been active in various fundraising projects, Lynn Ndlovu, said besides fundraising, the charity golf day will be used to raise awareness about hydrocephalus and needs for children living with the condition. “Hydrocephalus Association is an initiative that works with children living with hydrocephalus in Zimbabwe. The association has land lying fallow in Nkulumane 12 given to it by the city council and we intend to put up their school, clinic and institution,” said Ndlovu. Players are each expected to pay US$15 for green fees. Hydrocephalus is a build-up of fluid in the brain. The excess fluid puts pressure on the brain, which can damage it, and if left untreated, it can be fatal. Harry Allen Golf Club chairman and business executive, Victor Rakabopa, called upon members of the golfing community and corporates to support the event, saying there will be an exceptional prize table and massive advertising space for companies to showcase their products and make a lasting footprint in the Bulawayo market and beyond. “Harry Allen is proud to contribute to the welfare of these children through sports,” said Rakabopa. Club captain Vusumuzi Sinyoka said he was looking forward to a successful fundraiser, adding that the tournament format will be a 4 Ball Better Ball Stableford. A 4 Ball is when a pair of golfers form a team and whichever of the pair makes the better score on each hole counts as the team score for that hole. “The course is in very good condition and players will enjoy the putting greens. Harry Allen has reached championship golf venue status. The whole of Bulawayo’s golfing and business community is encouraged to participate in this noble cause,” said Sinyoka.