The Chronicle Leonard Ncube in Binga
BINGA district is lagging behind by 20 years in terms of development because of voting for the opposition MDC which has been clueless about uplifting livelihoods of ordinary citizens. Zanu-PF now wants to reclaim control of the district and the upcoming by-elections is an opportunity not only for the party, but also for the people of Binga to vote for development. The party held a rally addressed by its Secretary for Administration Cde Obert Mpofu at Sinakoma Secondary School grounds in Binga yesterday. Multitudes of Zanu-PF supporters attended the rally that was organised to introduce and drum up support for the party’s candidate for Binga North Constituency, Cde Kudakwashe Mavula Munsaka.  The meeting was also meant to lay the ground for a star rally to be addressed by President Mnangagwa next week on Saturday in Siabuwa. Binga has two constituencies-Binga North and Binga South which had been in the hands of opposition MDC since 2000.
Binga North fell vacant following the recall of Mr Prince Dubeko Sibanda from Parliament by the MDC-T led by Douglas Mwonzora. Dr Mpofu who was accompanied by the party’s Matabeleland North Provincial chairman Cde Richard Moyo and Central Committee member Cde Sikhanyisiwe Mpofu said Zanu-PF is the party for development. He said as a listening President, President Mnangagwa was ready to listen to concerns which may have made the people of Binga vote for the opposition for the past 20 years. “Maybe there is something we are doing wrong, please tell us. President Mnangagwa sent us to ask you that. Please tell us where we are going wrong so that we apologise. “I know the problem is not with you but us leaders because people understand that this country was liberated by Zanu-PF, that is Zanu and Zapu and not MDC which works with our enemies. So we have to blame ourselves as leaders. We have to be fair to everyone and make sure that whenever food or regalia comes, everyone is given equally,” said Cde Mpofu. He appealed to people in Binga to take pride in voting for their own son Cde Munsaka. Cde Mpofu urged the district to be wary of the opposition and non-governmental organisations whose agenda is to mislead people using food handouts without a clear development agenda. “Let’s unite and work together as Binga. We want to be proud of you,” said Cde Mpofu. He said the Second Republic under President Mnangagwa’s administration is committed to uplifting Binga once regarded as marginalised, by availing equal opportunities for the people. Cde Mpofu said already Binga Rural District Council chief executive Mr Joshua Muzamba and recently appointed District Development Co-ordinator Mr Land Siansole Kabome are locals. He said Zanu-PF in the New Dispensation had also appointed Cde Elias Sibanda from Binga as a director at the party’s headquarters in Harare. Provincial chairman Cde Mayo said there is no development from the opposition as evidenced by the past two decades. “You are aware that we haven’t had development in Binga for the past 20 years and this is because you have not been walking together with Government. This is why we have challenges with water, health facilities and schools where our children walk long distances to satellite schools which are not registered. “All this is because we vote for opposition. The opposition does not rule and will never be in power. So God has given us a chance that after all these recalls by the opposition, it’s time for us to make corrections because you now know Zanu-PF is the only party in power and capable of bringing development to Binga,” said Cde Moyo. He said Cde Munsaka has been busy on the ground identifying and implementing community projects. Cde Munsaka successfully worked to have Manjolo Business Centre reconnected to electricity after years of darkness following vandalism of cables. He also facilitated connection of Siabuwa which never had electricity before. “Vote for him and test development,” said Cde Moyo. — @ncubeleon