The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter 
BULAWAYO-based top Zimbabwean road runners Isaac Mpofu and Ngonidzashe Ncube are expected to be part of the national team that goes into camp today to prepare for the World Championship Marathon qualifiers.  The duo will be under the guidance of National Athletics Association of Zimbabwe (Naaz) long distance coach Benson Chauke. The two will be joined by four other marathon runners that will be announced today, including middle-distance athletes, to help the 42km participants. Mpofu and Ncube, who left a mark at last year’s Sanlam Cape Town Marathon in South Africa when they finished in the top 10, will be in camp in Harare until they leave for the South Africa National Championship Marathon set for May 8. In the Cape Town meet, Mpofu crossed the finish line in two hours 11 minutes 41 seconds to finish seventh, while Ncube was 10th, a minute behind Mpofu. Having narrowly missed the qualifying time for the World Championships, which is two hours 11 minutes 30 seconds, the pair has a chance to earn qualification in May. “We’re putting a marathon team as part of their preparation to run in the South Africa National Championship Marathon. The race is a qualifying event for the World Championships in the USA in July,” Chauke. “We’re sending a smaller team as we want to make sure the guys have the best in terms of preparation. It will be a team of six marathon runners and they’ll be joined by some pacesetters. The major objective is that once they qualify for the World Championships, it will be easier to make it for the next Olympics.” He said they were expecting the athletes in camp last night, to start training today. “Some athletes that will be assisting marathon runners are Wellington Varevi, Moses Tarakino, Elijah Mabhunu and Tendai Zimuto, who compete in the 10km and 21km races. “During camp, we intend to have shorter races like the 10km and a half-marathon to assist our marathon runners. I believe having this camp will also create some camaraderie feeling in camp,” said Chauke. – @ZililoR