The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter 
ZIMBABWE Cricket (ZC) board on Monday made various technical appointments for all national teams. Lalchand Rajput remains the senior men’s national team coach, while former South African all-rounder Lance Klusener rejoins the Chevrons as batting coach. Klusener takes over from Stuart Matsikenyeri, who moves into the position of assistant coach. He previously served as Zimbabwe’s batting coach between 2016 and 2018. Most recently, he was head coach of the Afghanistan national team. ZC announced that it was in the process of finalising the appointment of a bowling coach and a fitness trainer for the senior men’s national team. Gary Brent was appointed the senior women’s team head coach. Brent is a former Zimbabwean bowler, who played four tests, 70 one-day internationals and three T20s in his 12-year career.  Sean Williams has been confirmed as the Test captain and will be deputised by Regis Chakabva. Craig Ervine is the ODI captain with Chakabva as his understudy, while Mary-Anne Musonda retained her place as skipper of the senior women’s side, with Josephine Nkomo as her deputy. Zimbabwe cricket technical staff Senior men’s national team Head coach – Lalchand Rajput Assistant coach – Stuart Matsikenyeri Batting coach – Lance Klusener Fielding coach – Shepherd Makunura Analyst – Mufaro Chiturumani Physiotherapist – Travor Wambe Team manager – Dilip Chouhan Media manager – Darlington Majonga Logistics manager – Lovemore Banda Team doctor – Dr Solomon Madzogo senior women’s national team Head coach – Gary Brent Assistant coach – Sinikiwe Mpofu Bowling coach – Trevor Garwe Fielding coach – Trevor Phiri Analyst – Keith Kulinga Physiotherapist – Farai Mabasa Fitness trainer – Clement Rizhibowa Team manager – Caroline Nyamande Media manager – Yvonne Mangunda Team doctor – Dr Solomon Madzogo Under-19 men’s national team Head coach – Prosper Utseya Analyst – Keith Kulinga Team manager – Dilip Chouhan Media manager – Darlington Majonga Team doctor – Dr Solomon Madzogo Under-19 women’s national team Head coach – Trevor Phiri Assistant coach – Sinikiwe Mpofu Bowling coach – Trevor Garwe Analyst – Keith Kulinga Fitness trainer – Clement Rizhibowa Team manager – Caroline Nyamande Media manager – Yvonne Mangunda Team doctor – Dr Solomon Madzogo Selection panels Senior men’s team Convener – David Mutendera Selectors: Elton Chigumbura, Utseya, Graig Ewing Senior women’s team Convener – Julia Chibhabha Selectors: Emily Jinjika, Thando Mlilo Under-19 men’s team Convener – Chigumbura Selectors: Jestinos Gwatiringa, Pollock Mubhobho, Andrew Durham, Denford Kumundati Under-19 women’s team Convener – Julia Chibhabha Selectors: Trevor Garwe, Trevor Phiri   