The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter MORE than 5 000 women from three districts in Matabeleland North have benefited from empowerment programmes initiated by the Zanu-PF Women’s League and Government. Speaking in Binga recently, Women’s Affairs, Community, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Minister Sithembiso Nyoni said more women will be trained in various projects in the remaining districts as the ruling party forges ahead with its programme of empowering citizens countrywide. She said the Women’s League will empower 200 women in each constituency. Minister Nyoni was speaking at a recent star rally addressed by President Mnangagwa in Siabuwa, Binga. “I stand here your Excellency to announce that your Vision 2030 where you said this country should be a middle income-society is moving forward.  What we are trying to do is make sure rural women are not left behind and are part of Vision 2030. We have started very aggressively with the department of business development in the ministry led by the Women’s League. We have been training women in constituencies where we are campaigning as a quick start for 2023 and so far, we have trained 200 women in each constituency. Today here we are doing mop-up giving them starter packs so that they see that your vision is real,” said Minister Nyoni. She said women are being trained in chicken rearing, detergents making as well as making dishwashing liquids and sanitisers. The training also includes how to start a business, said Minister Nyoni. “Here 74 women will each get 25 chickens and feed. The women are expected to use the proceeds from selling the chickens to start their businesses. About 48 women will get detergents making, dishwashing starter packs, petroleum jelly and sanitiser making materials which will help them start their businesses and they are getting these today,” said Mnister Nyoni.. She said 1 500 women in Binga, 800 in Tsholotsho and over 2 500 in Umguza have benefited. Women and youth in Binga will also benefit from fishing rigs handed over to the district. — @ncubeleon