The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter 
THE Zimbabwe Rugby Union (ZRU) has released an enlarged provisional Sables’ squad, which also incorporates the Goshawks squad, that will do battle in the Currie Cup tournament in South Africa next month. The national men’s team will compete in the Currie Cup under the name Goshawks; a developmental feeder team to the Sables’ side, to give young players exposure to international rugby and an opportunity to prove their mettle. “While this is a wider squad, the management team of the Sables and Goshawks have not completely shut the door on any players who will be playing well at their clubs.  Some players, due to foreseen and unforeseen circumstances, will only be available for a period at which time the wider pool will come in handy. The final travelling team for the Currie Cup and qualifiers in France will be announced soon,” ZRU said. The union said the final squad for the 2022 Rugby Africa Cup in France that also serves as the final round of qualifiers for the Rugby World Cup 2023 will be announced on May 22. The squad is expected to camp in Harare and Cape Town from where it will fly to France for the 2022 Rugby Africa Cup in July.
At the Rugby Africa Cup, Zimbabwe will face off against Côte d’Ivoire in the quarter-finals and should they overcome Ivorians, they will most likely face Namibia in the last four. Meanwhile, leading female rugby referee Precious Pazani’s star continues to rise after World Rugby appointed her as an assistant referee for the Women’s Six Nations tournament in France. This will be the first Women’s Six Nations for Pazani and fellow assistant referee Maria Latos of Germany, while Chris Assmus of Canada will make his television match official (TMO) debut in the Championship. Pazani will be assistant referee in the match between France and Italy on March 27 at Stade des Alpes in Grenoble and again on April 2 in the game pitting France and Ireland at Stade Ernest Wallon in Toulouse. Sables enlarged squad Forwards: Farai Mudariki, Cleopas Kundiona, Gabriel Sipapate, Doug Juscczyk, Bornwell Gwinji, Victor Mupunga, Dean Makoni, Michael Kumbirai, Demos Mbauya, Panashe Rukodzi, Tyran Fagan, Aaron Juma, Mathew Mandiona, Declan Ralphs, David Makamba, Godwin Mangenje, Kudakwashe Nyakufaringwa, Goerge Saungweme, Godfrey Muzanaragwo, Sean Beevor, Tonderai Chiwambutsa, Johan Stander, Biselele Tshamala, Mungo Mason, Aiden Burnett, Sebastian Roche, Nyasha Tarusenga, Kelvin Kanenungo, Buthe Mavesere, Connor Prtichard, Jason Fraser, Tapiwa Tsomondo. Backs: Hilton Mudariki, Kyle Galloway, Keith Chiwara, Brendon Curle, Boyd Rouse, Takudzwa Chieza, Marcus Nel, Ngoni Chibuwe, Russell Dinha, Riaan O’neill, Darrel Makwasha, Shayne Makombe, Mathew McNab, Takudzwa Kumadiro, Brandon Mudzekenyedzi, Munashe Chaitezvi, Tapiwa Mafura, Daniel Capsopoulos, Brendon Mandivenga, Tawanda Matipano, Connor Kennedy – @innocentskizoe