The Chronicle Philani Nkomo
TERRIFIC Tech, a highly renowned ICT company established seven years ago by a group of technology enthusiasts passionate about the modern workplace, is on a drive to grow business.  Focused on customer relationship management and analytics-driven selling, it has seen it fit to share the same energy, insight and foresight with other African businesses. Since its inception it has gained extensive experience through engagement with businesses across the African continent to realise part of their digital transformation objectives. Terrific Tech believes that key to success is its ability to meet client’s expectations with enough flexibility to ensure that it goes all the way to complete projects. It continually grows new services as it further innovates new solutions with future technologies. This allows the company to ensure it stays ahead of the competition and keep delivering first-class service to clients. “As industry experts Terrific Tech does not follow trends, it creates them,” said the company in a statement.
Its innovations have set new standards for the industry, shaping the way businesses grow. Moreover, its integrated technology support plan is a beacon of light to every business because it simplifies the technology that companies use. Above and beyond Terrific Tech, prides itself in the fact that it maintains an exceptional track record of both meeting and exceeding expectations. Over the years it has been helping organisations throughout the African region manage their IT with its unique approach to technology management and consultancy solutions. “Terrific Tech is also a cloud solution provider, which advocates cloud productivity to their customers as a productivity and performance management tool and empowers customers with leading-edge technology solutions and support to meet the future demands of their industry. “We strive to design unique solutions and services that improve customers’ technology experience and offer favourable return-on-investment. Moreover, as part of our mission, we try to remain relevant through innovative and well-designed solutions developed with leading technologies to meet the values of clients’ businesses,” the company said. It also seeks to provide simple and efficient productivity and analytics solutions that enable customers to be more productive without breaking their bank, delivered in scope and within agreed timelines. The IT company believes in creating a superior customer experience through utmost transparency and continuous assessment towards improvements. It is also reliable in providing the best return-on-investment through value-added consulting and services.
Moreso, it is involved in helping its clients reduce or eliminate risk when implementing new technologies, designing innovative architecture for future IT resources that deliver new business value and streamline processes. It goes without saying that Terrific Tech is socially responsible in ensuring a positive and beneficial balance through ethical policies and practices for customers, employees, shareholders, and community. Terrific Tech is proud to be able to operate with a team that is highly skilled and proficient in the cloud computing infrastructure. Networking from the very beginning, they work closely together every step of the way, making sure that even the tiniest details get exactly right. When you work with their team, you are sure to notice their sense of joy in bringing your product together. The team loves meeting deadlines and celebrates every achievement as a team.