The Chronicle lnnocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
SIZINDA South Beer Garden is set to be a hive of activity on Saturday with more than 20 boxing bouts lined up for the Zimbabwe Boxing Federation national boxing tournament.  The tournament is part of the federation’s preparations for the Zone 4 Games that will be held in Maputo, Mozambique, from April 20-23. ZBF technical director Steve Masiyambumbi said they are expecting winners from last month’s tournament in Victoria Falls to be in the tournament. He said they will have boxers from all over the country, adding that they aim to host as many tournaments as possible to prepare boxers for various upcoming regional events that include the Region 5 games scheduled for Malawi in December. “This is our first tournament in Bulawayo since sporting activities resumed and as a country we need to fully prepare our boxers at all levels. “We are having the Region 5 games in Malawi in December, the All-Africa Games next year and the Youth Africa Games in Egypt this year. Our main focus now is to come up with good boxers at all levels, especially young ones. “Our boxers failed to qualify for the Olympic Games, but this time around I believe we have enough time to prepare our young boxers to ensure they qualify for the next Olympic Games and the Africa Youth Games in 2026 in Senegal and by 2028 these boxers will be will be seniors,” he said. Masiyambumbi said with the current senior team most likely to have turned professional by 2028, it is imperative to groom young talent. He said watching a 19-year-old Ukrainian boxer emerging victorious at the World Championships last year made him realise that if they adopt the same focus they can achieve more results in the medal podium as long as there is full support from all stakeholders and Government. “We are expecting boxers from all over the country, including the Zimbabwe National Army and Air Force of Zimbabwe as well as champions from all weight divisions that include the likes of Blessings Sibanda, Lawrence Chiyangwa, Anesu Motsi, Luckmore Kamoto, Agnes Kwashi, Lwazi Mpofu, Lloyd Mujibilikwa, Mpendulo Donga, Wisdom Dube, Sizalikuhle Ndlovu, Ntandolwenkosi Nyongoloza, Trade Nkomozabo, Mandlenkosi Marusenga.” — @innocentskizoe