The Chronicle Mbulelo Mpofu, Showbiz Reporter
RAPPER Holy Ten hogged the headlines on Sunday after throwing a jibe at all those who won awards at the recently held Zimbabwe Music Awards (Zima) and the National Arts Merit Awards (Nama) ceremonies.  Holy Ten aka Samanyanga who ruled the roost at the Pogues Zimbabwe Hip-Hop Awards last year with three gongs for the Best Male, Best Album and the People’s Choice categories was not even nominated for any category for the Namas and Zimas. Despite his 2021 exploits which saw him produce Risky Life, an album that had hit songs such as Machills, Wakatuka Amai, Time, Bho Zvangu and Sahwira, many thought that this time around, he would get a nomination, but that was not the case. On Sunday, Holy Ten took to Twitter to “congratulate” winners. “Congratulations to everyone who won Zimas and Namas. Even though you know you don’t deserve them, congratulations,” he tweeted. When contacted for clarity on the matter, Holy Ten’s manager, Shawn Maguma responded with a blatant: “No comment.” Such a response made people’s imaginations run wild as they weighed in their thoughts on the matter. Commented one Simba263: “I’m a big fan bro, but haaa, I think you’re missing the mark here. We hate to see you go that way man. You are not the first talented artist to not be acknowledged so get it, delete that tweet, you are better than that.” Rufaro Giselle Munjoma weighed in with, “We also felt other people who won were not better than their fellow nominees. You are a very good artist and you have your own style, you ain’t trying to be someone else. Your fans will always know that. “You can do better than this. Why can’t you congratulate them without the even though part? It shows your fans a lot about you. The game is for everybody. Just focus on giving us hits and making features.” Tete Fadzie cited jealousy and said: “You don’t sound genuinely happy for those who won awards. If anything, there’s an element of jealousy and bitterness in your message.” Mcthomas PrimeMan said: “Your problem is that you imagine your self as the only relevant rapper in Zimbabwe. You know what? Continue to register in your mind that you are the best and you will flop soon. Learn to appreciate competition and you will strive for success.” Why would Holy Ten post such words? Was he just being “jealous” of those who won or was he snubbed by awards organisers? – @eMKlass_49