The Chronicle THE EcoCash Holdings Zimbabwe Limited’s insurance unit Moovah is calling upon Zimbabweans to take up travel insurance to mitigate against risks such as accidents, illness, injury, trip cancellations and baggage loss when they travel abroad. As the world slowly returns to normal following Covid-19 pandemic restrictions, many countries — including Zimbabwe — have been announcing the reopening of borders for in and outbound travel. Countries such as South Africa, Namibia, Botswana, Iceland, Norway, Slovenia, Hungary, Ireland and Romania, among several others around the world, have already announced the removal of travel restrictions on certain conditions. But with the opening of borders and the return of normal travel comes an increase in the usual travel-related risks, such as trip delays and cancellations, overseas medical expenses, loss of personal belongings, personal liability or even permanent disability. Moovah says the biggest fear most people have when travelling out of their country is falling ill or losing their luggage in transit, or in an unfamiliar foreign country. “Embarking on overseas travel, whether for business or leisure, requires thorough preparation to ensure the trip is safe and enjoyable.  This is why having reliable travel insurance becomes an essential part of travel,” the company said. “Our travel insurance acts as a safety net against the risk of incurring unforeseen medical expenses and also safeguards against travel-related emergencies, such as losing your passport or checked-in luggage.” Moovah noted that thousands of Zimbabweans experience some kind of challenges when holidaying abroad every year, with some of them ending up stranded, due to lack of insurance. “We offer travellers the assurance and confidence they need to plan and book their flights knowing that they are covered from these risks, whatever happens,” Moovah said. The company’s travel insurance provides several types of coverage, including accident, illness, injury, trip interruptions, luggage loss or damage, delays, and so much more. Moovah, which provides travel insurance under different packages — including Comprehensive, Premier, Visa and Business to cater for different client needs — said its travel insurance product also comes to customers’ aid when flights are either delayed, cancelled or they need to return home in the case of an emergency occurs. “Without travel insurance, disruptions to your trip can end up costing you a fortune. -In many cases, you lose the fare you have already paid, and have to pay for new bookings. Our travel insurance packages will cover such incidences,” the company added. To take up Moovah’s all-round travel insurance cover, visit <https://econet.hollardti.com/Insurance>