The Chronicle Business Reporter
A TOTAL of 386 direct exhibitors have booked their space so far ahead of the country’s prime trade showcase, the Zimbabwe International Trade Fare (ZITF), which is scheduled for next month in Bulawayo. The event will be held from 26 to 30 April under the theme: “Rethink, Reimagine, and Reinvent Value Chains for Economic Development.” Kenyan President, Uhuru Kenyatta will be the guest of honour at the official opening ceremony scheduled for Friday, 29th April 2022. Industry and Commerce Minister, Dr Sekai Nzenza, updated Cabinet on Tuesday about the state of preparedness towards the 62nd edition of the ZITF.  She highlighted on the progress made and gave a detailed outline of key programmes for the duration of the event. “To date, 386 direct exhibitors have booked 43 444 of the 48 719 square metres of exhibition space, which is equivalent to 89,17 percent of the available space,” reads part of the post-Cabinet report. “Another highlight at the ZITF is the ‘Connect Africa Symposium’ scheduled for 28th April, 2022, where His Excellency President Dr ED Mnangagwa will deliver the keynote address.” Minister Nzenza said the ZITF International Business Conference will be held on 27th April and Vice President, Dr Constantino Chiwenga will give the keynote address and officially open the gathering. Another key highlight will be the ZITF Diplomats Forum scheduled for 28 April, which is a forum for business and diplomatic exchanges. This year’s ZITF will also have platforms targeted at the youth to discuss topics such as education and innovation. Dr Nzenza said the aim is to examine how best our future leaders can be empowered and how best they can benefit from current initiatives. These events include the following: the Scholastica Conference scheduled for 26th April, which will run under the theme: “Economic development through innovation and heritage: Promoting talent and skill-based education”. The forum is expected to bring together learners, education experts and career advisors to share information on strategic human capital development in order to create a self-sustaining and enterprising economy. Career guidance sessions and presentations will also run parallel while the Innovators’ Forum will take place on 26th to 27th April under the theme: “Innovation for Sustainable Value Chains.” The session will incorporate a pitch competition, a hackathon and speaker presentations. “The forum provides a platform for young innovators and entrepreneurs to highlight their innovations, network and exchange knowledge with their peers, with a view to reviving the industry,” said the minister.