The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
ZIMBABWE Energy Regulatory Authority (Zera) chief executive, Mr Eddington Mazambani, has called for increased enforcement of installation of solar heating appliances on all new power connections to ensure energy efficiency.  This has a net effect of reducing unnecessary power usage, especially at a time when the country is struggling to provide enough electricity to users, he said. Stakeholders at the just ended 3rd International Renewable Energy Conference and Expo, also implored the Zimbabwe Electricity Transmission and Distribution Company (ZETDC) to embrace technology and introduce the smart grid concept. A smart grid is an intelligent network, which allows real time communication between the utility and consumers whereby a consumer can monitor usage and if they realise that something has been switched on at home, they can remotely switch it off. This comes as the Zimbabwe Electricity Supply Authority is working on rolling out smart technology, which includes smart electricity meters that will enable consumers                                 to control usage and the power utility to remotely disconnect those who default on payment. Zesa intends to install in excess of 2 000 smart meters this first quarter and another                    4 000 in the second quarter. Speaking at the event, Mr Mazambani said the new net metering regulations allow properties, including households to generate 5MW of renewable energy up from 100kw, for local consumption and feeding excess to the national grid. “In terms of geysers, we have regulations, which were promulgated in 2019 in terms of electrification of new connections by the utility, which requires that any new connections should ensure that the house being connected has solar water heating geysers,” he said. “After analysing consumption patterns, it was realised that the bulk of electricity is being used for heating and cooling. That’s an inefficient way of using electricity and by enforcing the installation of solar water heating geysers, we want to ensure that there is efficient use of electricity at homes.” Energy and Power Development Permanent Secretary, Dr Gloria Magombo said a lot of work needs to be done to transition from old power generation and consumptions systems to new technology, which also lowers costs of energy. She called upon energy stakeholders to explore all options available to ensure energy efficiency, adding that her ministry will continue engaging with the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe and Ministry of Finance and Economic Development on creating a conducive environment in smart energy production. The Government phased out old geysers some years back to ensure energy efficiency as the geysers are among high energy consumers. Even in hotels, concerns have been raised about high-power consumption by geysers, air conditioning and other lighting appliances that should be replaced with smart energy technology. The push towards adoption of renewable energy, with solar, hydro, wind and gas among the green energy sources is also being pursed. Meanwhile, in Victoria Falls, close to 130 families that are in new CBZ stands have pooled resources together to connect electricity to their houses with the help of Zesa. The suburb was established in 2015 and home-seekers started building their houses in 2016, and a majority of them are currently running on solar as owners installed solar system. Each household paid around US$600  for the new electricity connections and Mr Tafadzva Mtowa who chairs the initiative said they are almost done with preparations and will be connected to the grid soon. — @ncubeleon