The Chronicle GOVERNMENT has initiated a self-assessment exercise of the entire local diamond value chain, in preparation for a mandatory Kimberly Process Certification Scheme (KPCS) evaluation in May, and is aiming to set a high benchmark of compliance to the requirements of the global diamond watchdog. On Tuesday, Mines and Mining Development Minister Winston Chitando reported to Cabinet that a Kimberly Process team will be undertaking a review visit to Zimbabwe between May 8 and 13, 2022. The last review was conducted in 2012. “A Kimberly Process team will be undertaking a review visit to Zimbabwe from 8th to 13th May 2022. This is to enable Zimbabwe to undergo a review process every five years,” said Information, Publicity and Broadcasting Services Minister Monica Mutsvangwa in a post Cabinet media briefing. “Zimbabwe, which is vice chair of the African Diamond Producers Association (ADPA), is set to host a meeting of the Council of Ministers and meeting of experts in Hybrid format at Elephant Hills Hotel, Victoria Falls from 6th to 8th April 2022.” The minister also said a proposal was tabled for approval to be given for application to export used catalytic converter recovered from vehicles, which have come to the end of the useful lives.  The KPCS is an international, multi-stakeholder initiative created to increase transparency and oversight in the diamond industry in order to eliminate trade in conflict diamonds. Mines and Mining Development Deputy Minister Polite Kambamura also told a stakeholder preparedness workshop on Wednesday that the self-assessment was being done in coordination with civil society and industry players. “As the vice-chair of the KPCS, it is important that Zimbabwe sets a benchmark of compliance to the maximum requirements of the KPCS,” he said. “As part of efforts to ensure that the KPCS review is a success, the Ministry of Mines is coordinating a self-assessment exercise, which started at the beginning of March this year. This will help us assess the state of our readiness for the KPCS review visit.” Explaining progress registered in the self-assessment exercise, chief director mining development in the Ministry, Mercy Manyuchi said the evaluation team would include experts from South Africa, as the team leader, Angola, the DRC, the United States, the European Union, civil society, and the World Diamond Council. The local diamond industry is expected to contribute US$1 billion to the target US$12 billion mining income level by 2023. -New Ziana/Business Chronicle