The Chronicle Chronicle Reporter
PROSECUTOR-GENERAL Kumbirai Hodzi has resigned from his post due to ill-health, Chief Secretary to the President and Cabinet Dr Misheck Sibanda announced yesterday. In a statement, Dr Sibanda said Mr Hodzi resigned yesterday on medical grounds and wished him a speedy recovery.  “It is with regret that I announce the resignation of Honourable Kumbirai Hodzi as Prosecutor-General. His resignation has come about due to ill health requiring medical attention. In the light of this, His Excellency the President, Dr ED Mnangagwa, has accepted the resignation,” he said. “On behalf of His Excellency the President, the Office of the President and Cabinet, and indeed on my behalf, I wish Honourable Hodzi speedy recovery.” Dr Sibanda said President Mnangagwa would redeploy Mr Hodzi elsewhere in the service as soon as his health improves. Mr Hodzi was appointed Prosecutor-General in July 2019, replacing Advocate Ray Goba who had resigned the previous year. During his tenure, Mr Hodzi introduced far-reaching institutional changes in the Office of the Prosecutor-General
Prior to this appointment, Mr Hodzi served Government as Deputy Attorney General in charge of the Legal Advice Section since 2012. Mr Hodzi was one of the 10 candidates who were interviewed publicly for the esteemed post at the end of 2018. The other candidates were Mrs Noria Mashumba, Mrs Florence Ziyambi, Ms Jessie Majome, Mrs Wendy Chingeya, Justice Maphios Cheda, Mr Misheck Hogwe, Mr Tinomudaishe Chinyoka, Mr Edmund Marondedza and Mr Tichaona Mantsebo. JSC advertised the post in the Press following the resignation of Adv Goba after he was suspended from office on a raft of allegations of misconduct such as failing to prosecute high-profile cases, travelling without Cabinet authority and use of abusive language. The office of the PG had become a hot seat, with two previous prosecutor-generals being fired for misconduct. Adv Goba was the third PG to leave office. The first to be removed from office was former Attorney-General Mr Sobusa Gula-Ndebele in May 2008, who doubled as head of criminal prosecution and civil litigation. He was fired for conducting himself in a manner inconsistent with public office. The dismissal followed recommendations by a tribunal which investigated him. Mr Gula-Ndebele was succeeded by Mr Johannes Tomana, who was also removed from office after a tribunal found him to be grossly incompetent in the execution of his duties.