The Chronicle Michael Magoronga, Midlands Correspondent
Comedian Slimy/Baba Junior has made a sensational claim that he is being overlooked because he hails from a small town. Slimy (real name Thompson Muzondiwa), who resides in Redcliff has been filming his recordings in and around the town. He made a name together with Melissa Sithothombe, who acts as Mai Junior, during the height of Covid-19 lockdowns when he started shooting videos and posting them on social media platforms. Since people were holed up in their homes, they resorted to online entertainment.  Through Magtom Enterprises, Slimy won a number of hearts including those of corporates who have offered his company advertising contracts. He, however, feels like he is being side-lined as organisers of awards like the National Arts Merit Awards (Nama) among others have not considered creatives like him despite their good productions. “The fact that we come from a small town comes with its cost, like not being considered for awards like the Namas and others. This is despite the fact that we are addressing social issues through our dramas. “We’ve been sending our works for consideration, but sadly we’ve been totally ignored,” said Slimy in an interview.
Despite this setback, he said he will soldier on and is not considering relocating to Harare. “We cannot all be in Harare. Sabhuku Vharazipi is making a name for himself while in his hometown. We’re very grateful to the Redcliff community for their support which keeps us going and we promise to continue shooting our recordings in the town.” He said although he clinched a deal with 3KTV for the airing of their drama series Complicated Affairs, it was not yet financially rewarding. “Our drama series is being shown on 3KTV, but we’re yet to reap the rewards. We, however, are looking forward to clinching one or two more deals as a result of the airing of our drama series on the channel that’s on DStv,” said Slimy. “We are getting a few here and there, but we also want big deals with big companies so that we can sustain ourselves. The arts industry isn’t paying so if we get one or two advertising deals, we can easily sustain our families,” he said. A natural and soft-spoken actor popular for his naughty Baba Junior character, Muzonidwa has grown to become a household brand. Among some of his productions are Complicated Affairs, Stingy Men Association, Shamwari Yakaipa Zvikuru, Chimoto Kuma Introductions and Shamwari Yemurume.
“I didn’t have any intentions of becoming an actor, but when I lost my mobile phone, I decided to put the novel into comedy. Before that, I’d tried to form a media company and had a fallout with other colleagues. Interestingly, this also led me to form my own media company MagTom,” narrated the actor. To date Magtom has worked with Zim Free Riders, Senditoo and Kadoma Range Stands among other corporates. The name Slimy, the actor said, was derived from his body stature. “I got the name as I’m slim by nature so I decided to play along and use that name. Some also call me Baba Junior as I always play the role of a married man.” He said Mai Junior was not his real-life wife. “I’m happily married and have a family which has nothing to do with my acting career. Mai Junior is only my wife on set,” he clarified.