The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
NOT only will Highlanders be desperate for maximum points when they face Tenax SC at Sakubva Stadium on Sunday, but they will also be hoping to register their first league victory away from Barbourfields Stadium since 2018. Bosso’s last victory on the road was when they beat Triangle 1-0 at Gibbo Stadium. Three coaches, Madinda Ndlovu, Pieter de Jongh and Mandla Mpofu, have overseen the team in the 24 winless missions away from home since that victory in 2018.
Sunday’s result could prove vital to both teams’ campaigns.  Bosso will be seeking to get their campaign back on track after a horrible start, while Tenax, who have collected four points in their last two games, will be hoping to continue picking up points. Interestingly, Tenax have faced the other three teams from Bulawayo in their last three games. They only lost to Chicken Inn, who gave them a 3-0 hiding. They went on to beat Bulawayo City 2-0 and drew nil-all with Bulawayo Chiefs. After Sunday, they would have played all the four Bulawayo-based teams, six rounds into the campaign. Despite Bosso’s run of bad form where they have won once in five attempts, Tenax coach Shadreck Mugurasave believes Bosso in their present state are more dangerous than ever. The coach expects Bosso to play even better when desperately needing a win. “We respect Highlanders. They are a big club that can rise at any time. I really don’t think their previous results matter. Remember our team is new in the league so we have to go in there with all the respect we can give them,” said Mugurasave. “We are preparing the same way we prepare for any other game. We are not going to change anything because we are facing Highlanders. The boys are in high spirits and looking forward to the match on Sunday.” Mugurasave has injury concerns in his camp, with Malvin Dumbura, Joseph Jambo, Takunda Mapara and Simon Munemeri all facing late fitness tests. The quartet failed to train with the rest of the team in the first two days of the week. “Their injuries are minor. We hope they will be back for Sunday,” said Mugurasave. In other matches slated for this weekend, Dynamos make the trip to Bulawayo to face Bulawayo Chiefs on Saturday in what promises to be an exciting encounter. Both sides will be hoping to recover from disappointing results last weekend. Chiefs were held to a goaless draw by Tenax, while Dynamos suffered what has become routine defeat to Chicken Inn. The Gamecocks pipped Dynamos 1-0.
Table toppers Manica Diamonds will face Yadah at Baobab Stadium. PSL matchday 6 fixtures Saturday
Herentals vs Bulawayo City (NSS)
Yadah vs Manica Diamonds (Baobab Stadium)
FC Platinum vs Harare City (Mandava Stadium)
Bulawayo Chiefs vs Dynamos (Barbourfields Stadium) Sunday
Caps, United vs WhaWha (NSS)
Cranborne Bullets vs Black Rhinos (Baobab Stadium)
Tenax vs Highlanders (Sakubva Stadium)
Triangle United vs Ngezi Platinum (Gibbo Stadium)
Chicken Inn vs ZPC Kariba (Luveve Stadium)
— @innocentskizoe