The Chronicle Yvonne Ncube, Showbiz Reporter
Kereng Khuphe, an emerging and promising artiste, was obliged to go against the norm and think for other orphans after losing his father at a young age.  The difficulties that came with being raised by a single mum taught the young artiste that those who do not have both parents face more challenges and that not everyone is born with a silver spoon in their mouth. The track Why me? which he released last month aims to advocate for orphan aid while also spreading awareness that there are charitable organisations that pay for orphans’ school fees, implying that money should not be a barrier to orphans receiving an education. The 22-year-old featured Eden Lang on the track which was produced by Motorepublik and recorded by Verseless. It is available on YouTube. “I grew up without a father and was raised by a single mother. As a result, I faced obstacles that many orphans face, such as my mother’s inability to pay for my school tuition. I was fortunate to have a mother who cared about me as my wellbeing was her worry. “But other children do not and this made me realise that they have far more serious issues than I do. This situation is what led me to write the song because I know a lot of orphans who’ve had similar experiences,” Khuphe said. “Why Me? is a song about a boy who has no parents. He has no one to provide him with decent food, shelter, or pay his school fees. The boy stays with abusive relatives and is contemplating suicide or fleeing to become a street kid. “So in this track, I tell the orphan that there are organisations like BEAM and Capernaum Trust that can help him pay his school fees so that he can get a better education. And also that he should not take drugs because they are bad for his health and that there are orphanages that can provide him with shelter,” said the artiste. The hip-hop singer said the song’s chorus strives to console the orphan, telling him things will get better, there is a solution to every problem, and that suicide is not an option. Khuphe started doing music at the age of 15. He has since composed three songs and has promised to release many more. “My musical journey began in 2015 when I was in Form Three at Mandwandwe High. There was a talent show I took part in with my friends and we won. From there, I realised that I was good at doing music and I started recording my own music. “Also at that time, I had a very supportive girlfriend who motivated me because she was also good at music. So sometimes I wrote tracks trying to impress her. The same year, I participated in the Starbrite competition but unfortunately, I didn’t go far. However, this made me realise that my failures make me stronger and it pushed me to work harder and improve,” he said. Showing the talent he possesses, last year, Khuphe was chosen by Motorepublik (Magamba Network) to work with them on their projects. — @SeehYvonne