The Chronicle Yoliswa Dube-Moyo, Matabeleland South Bureau Chief
The Environmental Management Agency (EMA) has said it will rein in mines and processing operations that are exacerbating air pollution. According to research, opencast mining contributes the highest atmospheric impact with emissions.  Hundreds of tonnes of rock are unearthed, moved, and crushed in mining operations significantly increasing the amount of dust and particulates in the air. In addition, mine tailings, which may contain finely ground and even toxic waste, can become airborne. This air pollution can directly affect human health. Statistical studies suggest a linkage between mining pollution and human disease and mortality. EMA Matabeleland South provincial manager Mr Decent Ndlovu said the authority is concerned with air pollution which is beyond acceptable levels. “When we measure air pollution at various operations and find that they’re not in compliance with the recommended standards, we compel them either through issuance of orders or continuous monitoring until they reach the required level. “If they fail to comply, we go the other extreme and let the law take its course but we first issue orders to put in place abatement measures to reduce high levels of pollution. We’re concerned with any pollution. “It should be controlled to come down to normal levels. If companies fail to comply, the law will not be spared. We have to apply the law,” said Mr Ndlovu. He said equipment to measure air pollution is however centralised. “Levels of pollution are not necessarily determined by what you see. We need to conduct tests to measure pollution levels. At times what we see may not be the real reflection of the extent of the pollution. “Of late, a lot of mines have not been doing well in terms of pollution control measures although I can’t ascertain the level right now because we need to first measure the pollution levels using the appropriate equipment. “We always need to do tests and determine the levels at which the pollution is happening,” said Mr Ndlovu. Air pollution control measures involve planning and implementing a series of preventive and suppressive measures in addition to dust extraction systems. Experts recommend various ways to combat pollution such as pollution control by trees, the tolerance of trees to different air pollutants and plant species useful for controlling pollution. They say there is a need for wider application of dust control chemicals on haul roads and sustainable management of pollution can be achieved by the proper implementation of abatement measures. Mining can pollute air and drinking water, harm wildlife and habitat, and permanently scar natural landscapes. Modern mines as well as abandoned mines are responsible for significant environmental damage. — @Yolisswa