The Chronicle Sikhulekelani Moyo, Chronicle Reporter
HARARE Institute of Technology together with Zimbabwe Institute of Foundry (ZIF) will later this month host the metal casting summit. The summit will be held under the theme: “Championing beneficiation of metals transforming the foundry industry”. ZIF has been engaging with different players in the foundry industry to promote beneficiation of metals in Zimbabwe as the country is rich in base metals which are a key raw material for foundries. Finance and Economic Development Minister Professor Mthuli Ncube will be the guest of honour at the upcoming event while Mines and Mining Development Minister Winston Chitando and his counterparts from the ministries of Women Affairs, Community, Small to Medium Enterprises Development Dr Sithembiso Nyoni as well as Industry and Commerce Minister Dr Sekai Nzenza will grace the occasion.  Highlights of the summit will include the unveiling of a new giant iron and steel company in Zimbabwe, exhibition of metal products and services as well as iron ore and copper ore beneficiation in the country. Speaking to Chronicle, ZIF chief operating officer Mr Dosman Mangisi said the upcoming summit offers a platform for stakeholders to deliberate on strategies to turnaround the metal industry in Zimbabwe. The summit covers the whole value chain of all base metal industries in Zimbabwe. He said the summit would also exhibit Zimbabwe’s intellectuals who have left an indelible mark in the world and are already back home to contribute to the country’s economic turnaround initiative. “The likes of Mureza automotive company, who have designed a car in South Africa, will be there showcasing their abilities. “This event will also help to exhibit our institutions like the Harare Institute of Technology (HIT) because the person who made a car in South Africa came out of that institution”. Mureza Auto Company is registered in Zimbabwe and South Africa and its founder and chief executive officer is Mr Tatenda Mungofa.