The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
Bulawayo Chiefs 1-2 Harare City BULAWAYO Chiefs coach Nilton Terroso accepted all responsibility for his side’s dismal display in their loss to a tactically disciplined Harare City at Luveve Stadium yesterday. There was late drama in the encounter as Harare City were forced to finish the game with 10 men after Donald Mudadi was sent off for a second bookable offence. The incident had no impact on the result as it occurred just before the last kick of the game. The visitors had gone into the lead after 33 minutes through Hastings Chapusha, who vollied home from close range. In the build-up to the goal, Chiefs had failed to pick their men in the box, while defending a set piece resulting in the ball falling kindly into the path of an unmarked Chapusha at the back post.  The visitors doubled their lead after the breather through Emmanuel Mandiranga in the 63rd minute. Mandiranga cleverly beat the Chiefs’ offside trap to find himself only with the keeper to beat. He skilfully went past Takabva Mawaya in goal for Chiefs before slotting home. Kelvin Madzongwe pulled one back for the hosts after 76 minutes. Heading home from close range a Malvin Mkolo cross. The visitors did well to hold on to the lead until full time. The hosts were far from perfect. “We did not have the combinations. We used the long ball more than what is normal for us. Everything that we did negatively today was my responsibility. I didn’t line up the team well and didn’t give the right information. In the end the result is my responsibility,” said Terroso.
Harare City coach Tawurayi Mangwiro felt that it was a tough encounter. “I thought it was not an easy game. It took good game management and application from everyone involved. I felt it was a tense finish in the end, but we did well to hold onto the lead,” said Mangwiro. The first real chance of the game fell to Chiefs after 15 minutes when Kelvin Madzongwe got a loose ball inside the City box, but directed his effort over the bar. A minute later, Billy Vheremu found himself alone and with acres of space on the edge of the box, but was let down by his technique as he shot wide with the inside of his foot. Three minutes later Farau Matare showed great pace to get behind Collin Mujuru and come face-to-face with Kelvin Shangiwa in goal for Harare City, but Matare’s effort was punched back into play. Mawaya produced a good save in the 30th minute by denying Innocent Zambezi from close range. Teams
Bulawayo Chiefs: Takabva Mawaya, Elvis Moyo (Authur Musiyiwa 57th min), Kelvin Madzongwe, Hughe Chikosa, Lucky Ndlela (Wilson Mensah 57th min), Malvin Mkolo, Kevin Moyo, Dela Arkoli (Emmanuel Chikwende 78th min), Billy Veremu (Lexington Mujokoro 87th min), Farawu Matare Harare City: Kelvin Shangiwa, Innocent Zambezi, Donald Dzvinyai, Hastings Chapusha, Collin Mujuru, Spencer Masunda, Donald Mudadi, Clive Rupiya, Wilfred Muvirimi (Zvikomborero Biseki 80th min), Tendai Mukono, Emmanuel Mandiranga
— @innocentskizoe