The Chronicle Mbulelo Mpofu, Showbiz Reporter
“I WOULD like to apologise for the upcoming events and shows. I have been suffering from fatigue and it has gotten worse. We have been working all year non-stop. We forgot I need at least a little bit of rest. I love you all, see you soon,” is what South African Amapiano singer Sir Trill wrote on his Twitter account last year when cancelling his shows. Sir Trill, of late, has been known to be one artiste who does not give a damn about pleasing his legion of fans and whoever may care about his music. His recent spate of actions have left a bitter taste in the mouth of fans who pay to see him perform and is in no show. Failing to show up in Sir Trill’s DNA as it is also said that he missed a show in the Eastern Cape recently leaving a question, “If he cannot take fans from his homeland seriously, what about those from the region and abroad?” Sir Trill is not an isolated figure when it comes to the “apology merchants” as local promoters have also been in the habit of not doing due diligence on making sure that the shows they organise are a success. The blame game starts when promoters fault the police or ill-conduct of the artistes while sometimes, poor management as far as time is concerned is the root cause of misery and those who suffer the most are fans. The ‘apology chorus’ started when the police stopped the “Big Boys Party” which was scheduled for Khumalo Hockey Stadium last month. Cassper Nyovest, Amaroto and NaakMusiQ were billed to entertain fans at the establishment, but that was not to be the case as police shut down the gig, citing noise pollution and violation of curfew and Covid-19 regulations. Organisers of the event, 3D Events Management issued an apology after the botched show. The statement read, “3D Events Management would like to express its profound and sincere apologies to valued patrons on the shutdown of the Sunday Summer Big Boys Party on 27 February at the Khumalo Hockey Stadium. The shutdown was unforeseeable as we had done all the logistics to our level best to make sure that the show was a success. We are in talks with the artistes’ management to organise new dates for the show.” This was a great move to pacify angry fans since social etiquette requires one to apologise whenever they err. “With regards to ticket holders, we kindly request that you get in touch with 3D Events Management. We apologise for the inconvenience caused and look forward to our next show. We hope you will give us the same support as you always do,” read the statement. The latest apology was offered by Fife Street Events who promised people the services of Amapiano artistes Sir Trill and Felo Le Tee for the Summer block party. “Fife Street Events would like to express its sincere and profound apologies to its valued patrons on the unexpected failure to appear and perform of artistes Sir Trill and Felo Tee at Eyadini on Sunday, 20 March. “After doing everything in our power to ensure that all logistical requirements were taken care of, and having received assurances from his team that he would be able to travel, Felo Tee did not make the trip to Bulawayo.  On the day of the event, the artiste’s team had informed us that he had sufficiently recovered from the bout of illness he suffered from during the week and was therefore ready to perform. Meanwhile, Sir Trill missed his flight and also did not have a valid Covid-19 test as required. Attempts to make other transport arrangements for him were fruitless. “We are now in talks with the artistes’ management teams to arrange for new dates for the shows. Any inconvenience is sincerely regretted and we hope we can still count on your continued support,” read the statement. All the apologies always contain the same message of fans contacting promoters, but one wonders, what’s the use if they will not be refunded? Also, in most cases, fans will no longer have proof that they bought tickets as they will have been disposed of the next day. One cannot help but think that promoters of the Summer block party must have been thanking the gods of showbiz for adding Sjava into the mix. Otherwise, it was going to be a disaster. The Umama singer made amends and performed. Are consumers of entertainment going to continue to be shortchanged when they pay to see international acts but get apologies and arrangements of new shows which do not materialise? I think it is time bodies like the Consumer Council of Zimbabwe protects the interests of music fans that are shortchanged because they are also consumers. Many times, the South African acts perform poorly and degrade the idea of them being the headline acts with short and unpolished sets. For example, South African Afro-pop duo, Blaq Diamond performed way below expectations last year when they graced Umguza Yacht Club and this did not go well with some fans. Fans have taken to social media to share their thoughts on the matter and one Bruce Tendai said local promoters should stop bringing in South African acts for now and go back to the drawing board. “I think Bulawayo promoters should chill a bit on bringing in South African acts for performances or else we try again in December,” he said. Replying to Tendai’s post, Thulani Kumalo Photography said South African artistes behave the way they do because they do not care about the local industry. “The problem is that they’re killing an industry they don’t care about but want to siphon money from it,” he said. Junior Mbanje who is part of Fife Street Events said they are contemplating getting their money back from Sir Trill. “We don’t think engaging Sir Trill would be a good idea since he has proved beyond reasonable doubt that he is a flip-flopper. We’d rather request that he sends our money back and we part ways in peace. It’s not a professional decision, but as it is, we have no choice at this point,” said Mbanje. Either way, this “we sincerely apologise. . .” must stop and a deeper look into what must be done to avoid shortchanging fans. Some of the problems faced by the industry are self-inflicted. For example, the issue around adjusting the time of starting and ending shows. Fans have cried foul when shows start late especially on Sundays when they have to go to work the following day. Noreen Dhliwayo said the problem is with the timelines that organisers prefer to use to introduce their main acts. “Most of the time, I’ve noticed that headline acts do not perform until late into the night. I attended the Blaq Diamond show last year and I remember they went onto the Umguza Yacht Club stage right after midnight and performed for two minutes. I wonder why promoters do that. “Those are some of the things that spoil their shows. Why can’t we just start gigs on time? said Dhliwayo.