The Chronicle Sukulwenkosi Dube-Matutu, Chronicle Reporter FOR nine-year-old Advocate Maphosa who is physically disabled, the walk to school is not an easy one and attending lessons has become a burden for him. He uses a faulty artificial leg, hence walking only brings excruciating pain to him. He can only get relief when he does not move around a lot. Advocate lives in Jahunda suburb in Gwanda with his parents. He got his artificial leg in 2017 but now it is broken and outdated and has to be replaced, but his parents do not have the money to get him another one. His mother recently took the artificial leg to a welder to have it mended but there has not been much change. When a Chronicle news crew visited Advocate’s home he had not gone to school as his leg was painful after walking about two kilometres to his school the previous day. Missing out on lessons is affecting his performance. Advocate, a Grade 4 pupil at St Christopher’s Primary School said he wants to go to school every day, but sometimes the pain is unbearable. “I love to walk around just like my other peers, but sometimes I experience great pain. My leg becomes painful and swollen especially when I walk on the tarred road or hard surface. Yesterday I walked to school and my leg became painful. When I walk on river sand it’s much better. I wish I could have a better artificial leg that can enable me to move around easily,” he said. Advocate said learning at a school for able-bodied pupils while he had a disability was a challenge as he sometimes experience bullying and name calling from his school mates. He said some children call him “one leg” and when he protests, they beat him up. His mother Ms Brilliance Gumbi said she needs US$140 to buy a decent artificial leg for her son. She said the one he was using was an old model that does not bend. Ms Gumbi said the pipe that was in the artificial leg broke and was replaced with wood.  She said the belts which were supposed to secure the leg were torn. Ms Gumbi said her son misses some school days to allow his leg to heal. She said she cannot afford to pay his transport money everyday so sometimes he walks to school. “My son needs an artificial leg because the one he is using is faulty. He sometimes has difficulties in walking as he will be feeling pain. He has to miss out on school on some days so that he can rest his leg. This is affecting his performance as he is missing out on lessons a lot. My husband and I rely on piece jobs and we can’t raise the money to buy an artificial leg. The one he needs costs US$140,” she said. Ms Gumbi said it pains her to see her son suffering so much and there was little she could do. She said there was a time when her son missed school for two weeks after his artificial leg broke. Ms Gumbi said those wishing to assist her can contact her on 0775817889.