The Chronicle Mbulelo Mpofu, Showbiz Reporter
THE Hustlers Summit that was held last week is set to be held annually after organisers were impressed by the inaugural edition which was a resounding success.  The two-day business symposium was held over two days at the Zimbabwe International Trade Fair (ZITF) show ground in Bulawayo. It brought together different captains of industry. In an interview, Hustlers Summit convener Nkosana Mazibisa said the event was a success. “The inaugural Hustlers Summit was an extreme success as eight entrepreneurs got short-listed by Stop to Start to receive equity capital. The total amount of seeding funded was US$2 000. Another success measure was in the numbers. Hordes of hustlers from around the city attended and the goal of creating a platform for networking among entrepreneurs was met. “This was the first of many to come so we’ll be hosting these kinds of events often. Those who attended saw how vibrant the atmosphere was so why not host another next year and the year after?” Mazibisa said. He said the event ignited a hunger for more of such events from entrepreneurs. “After the summit, I’ve been receiving numerous calls from entrepreneurs asking when the next summit will be,” said Mazibisa. The inaugural summit was held under the theme: “Ignite. Inspire. Innovate.” Popular South African musician, media personality and businessman Sbusiso “DJ Sbu” Leope was the guest speaker. The event was organised by MatLive Innovation Studio and saw a plethora of companies sponsoring the meeting. These were Skyz Metro FM, Mofaya, Econet Wireless, Creative Pot, the African Union, Team Ace Management and many more. After the Summit, DJ Sbu toured the city to see some of its historical sites and places where hustlers ply their trade. Some of the places DJ Sbu visited included City of Kings Apparel and Highlanders Football Club Clubhouse where he was given a replica of the first team’s home strip. DJ Sbu was the perfect person to invite as he is very passionate about uplifting fellow entrepreneurs. After his visit to the country, he has been posting video clips promoting the businesses of locals whom he interacted with. – @eMKlass_49