The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Reporter
BOOK lovers are set to be given an opportunity to meet the brains behind the pens as the launch of the Intwasa Short Stories Book 2 has been set for March 26. The launch slated for the National Gallery of Zimbabwe in Bulawayo will have a writers meet and greet session before other individual writers are given a platform to sell their books. The Intwasa Short Stories Book 2 launch comes after the Book 1 launch that was held successfully last year.  Intwasa Arts Festival koBulawayo director Raisedon Baya said the book launch marks the growth of the competition which has been running for years. “We have emerging writers locally and abroad and young writers who are starting to write and have a voice. One of the ideas has been to publish 20 stories from the shortlisted stories from each edition. This year we are launching 17 stories in the second anthology,” Baya said. He said one of the interesting things towards the journey of coming up with this anthology is that they managed to host a boot camp for shortlisted writers.  “During the boot camp, we tackled the art of writing short stories among other discussions and hope it added value to the competition. If funds permit, this is something that we’ll do this year and years to follow.” Baya said it is important that literature stays alive, especially at a time when there are a lot of things happening. “Readership in the country is dwindling as a lot of people are focusing on survival. We can’t have a society that is devoid of arts. We believe literature plays a critical role and must stay alive, that’s why we are having this book launch.” Preparations for the launch, Baya said, are going on very well with the writers eager to have their meet and greet session. “On the launch, we’re planning to have writers meet and greet where we’re inviting local writers who are not necessarily within the anthology to come and have discussions on the writing aspects. “There’ll also be books being sold from individual writers as the main aim is to create a book affair on the day.” – @mthabisi_mthire