The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
FRANCE-based Warriors’ midfield enforcer Marshal Munetsi has come short of declaring his support for the suspension of the country from all international football activities after Fifa imposed an indefinite ban citing undue third party influence. Zifa was last week removed from the global football family, which Fifa said was a consequence of the Zifa executive committee’s suspension by the Sports and Recreation Commission, which according to Fifa statutes, was in violation of what it stands for.  Taking on his Twitter timeline, the Stade Reims player said he was praying that the parties involved can get to a resolution quickly “so that we can get together to playing international football soon and the decisions made will, in fact, pave the way for better running of our football”. He said as a result of the forced abyss due to the Covid-19 pandemic that saw the country going for two years without football, there was a high risk that young footballers were now going to be lost as the players seek other means of livelihoods. “The ban on our national teams from international football and our local teams from international cup competitions is quite sad. Football has since evolved into a sport that’s more than just a sport; many livelihoods now depend on it, it’s a source of hope during tough times. “Football is a uniting table where people with differences can sit together and feast at the spectacle we call the beautiful game,” tweeted Munetsi. The former Orlando Pirates player said it has been two years without any meaningful development on the local football scene due to the Covid-19 pandemic, and as a result of that Zimbabwe stood to lose a young generation of talented footballers who now have to resort to other means of earnings because football has been in limbo. “As we were now getting back into some sort of cautious normalcy as we try to emerge from the effects of Covid-19 in our football, our beautiful nation gets struck by a ban on international football. Our football stands to lose quite a lot for many years as a result. I pray the parties involved can get to a resolution quickly so that we can get back to playing international football soon and the decisions made will in fact pave a way for better running of our football,” said Munetsi