The Chronicle Oliver Kazunga, Senior Business Reporter
PREPARATIONS for the Great Dyke Mining and Agriculture Investment Conference are now at an advanced stage with investors urged to attend the forum to appreciate and unlock investment opportunities in the Great Dyke region.  The Great Dyke is a linear geological feature that trends nearly north-south through the centre of Zimbabwe passing just to the west of Harare. The region consists of a band of short, narrow ridges and hills which are rich in gold, platinum group metals, chrome, and nickel, among other minerals. The conference, which will be held concurrently with an exhibition and the second edition of the Great Dyke Mining and Agriculture Awards on Friday, is being organised by a regional radio station, YAFM. The awards seek to honour business excellence in companies and individuals operating in the resource-rich Great Dyke belt. “Preparations for the event are now at an advanced stage and we have a number of sponsors who include Zimra, Mimosa, Vigilant Resources, Barmlo Investments, ZB Bank, Cell Insurance and Pote Holdings that have come on board to support the event. “The high point of the conference will be the presentation of the first-ever Great Dyke Investment Report commissioned by the regional radio station and compiled by renowned economist Professor Gift Mugano of Africa Economic Development Strategies (AEDS),” YAFM head of marketing Ms Tsitsi Nauruma said in a statement. “The Great Dyke Investment Report is really a must-have document for serious investors in the region. It maps out the investment potential which had hitherto been unexplored. “Through our efforts at YAFM, investors from the region and beyond will now be able to make investment decisions informed by an empirical study of resource potential and possibilities.” The event organisers said a number of sponsors were coming on board while companies and individuals keen on partnering them in making the forum even bigger were still being invited. Midlands Minister of State for Provincial Affairs and Devolution Senator Larry Mavima will be the guest of honour at the event. A number of panellists including the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe Deputy Director Economic Research Division Dr Nebson Mupunga will be representing the Apex bank’s Governor Dr John Mangudya. – @KazungaOliver