The Chronicle Simba Jemwa, Sports Correspondent
TEN foreigners are part of 60 pros scheduled to tee-off in the inaugural Arenel Pro Am at the Bulawayo Golf Club this morning. The tournament is expected to end on Saturday and its format is Medal for pro individuals and Stableford for 120 amateurs who will also be taking part. According to the organisers, US$20 000 has been set aside for the pros, while US$10 000 has been set aside for amateurs in  prizes and administrative costs, making the Arenel Pro Am the second richest golf tournament in the country after the Zimbabwe Open The Arenel Pro Am is the first major of the season and is one of the most anticipated events on the golfing calendar this year. With the last two years of the game lost to the global Covid-19 pandemic, the Arenel Pro Am tournament will delight golf purists, who will be excited by the return of competition. Staged at the picturesque Bulawayo Golf Club, the pristine undulating greens often tend to catch out inexperienced players, and players who have previous experience here tend to fare better. This event could become one of the most watched golfing events of the year, and a hugely popular betting event. Among the pros confirmed to tee-off this morning are the West Africa Tour trio of Robson Chinoi, Sydney Wember and Visitor Mapwanya, who join locals Philip Tshuma and Brian Gondo, who is also the tournament director.  There is plenty of hype surrounding Gondo and Tshuma heading into the Arenel Pro Am, as they will be home on the Bulawayo Golf Club greens. The duo is easily the pre-tournament favourites and has infallible knowledge of the course. The course is also likely to suit Gondo, as one of the longest drivers in the local game. Every winner of most tournaments in the modern game has been in the top 35 percent in terms of power hitting, and Gondo’s approach is likely to pay dividends. If he’s feeling 100 percent this time around, there’s no reason why Gondo should not clinch this tourney. With years as a respected player, who has had several top finishes on the Zambezi Tour, it’s easy to see why Hwange native, Tshuma is prominent among the favourites for the Arenel Pro Am. It wouldn’t be a surprise to see the veteran grab his first major success in two years. Mr Golf, as he popularly known, is renowned for his methodical approach to the game, but after three years of no competition, he could be let down by his putting game, which has been struggling of late. Also in the frame is Chinoi, who has a lot of experience playing on the Zambezi, Sunshine and West Africa Tours. He too is a big hitter and has also mastered the art of finesse. If his drive remains consistent over all three days, he could take the big prize home. Speaking ahead of this morning’s tee-off, Gondo said: “This tournament means a lot for Zimbabwe golf as this is the second biggest purse to the Zimbabwe Open and we haven’t had such an event in a while now. Our local players are really looking forward to it and this also hasn’t been played in Bulawayo for many years now. “It also gives game time to our pros and given that our sponsors Arenel were able to put up a prize fund that attracts players from other countries, definitely this going to be a very competitive tournament. Bulawayo Golf Club has been ready for such an event for a long time now the new committee has made sure that the golf course is up to standard and can host any event and we are definitely looking forward to hosting the Zimbabwe Open soon.” – @RealSimbaJemwa