The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
GOVERNMENT’S devolution policy is bearing fruit especially in Matabeleland North province where various projects have been implemented to improve the people’s welfare.  Addressing multitudes of Zanu-PF supporters at a star rally in Siabuwa on Saturday, President Mnangagwa said the Second Republic was pushing hard the devolution agenda and $42,5 billion has been allocated so far, with Matabeleland North getting $3,2 billion. Schools, clinics, roads and other projects have been constructed in the province. President Mnangagwa said Binga in particular, once seemingly marginalised, was set to get its first-ever nursing school and vocational training centre while a decent border post will be built. Chiefs, youth and women are set to be empowered after the ruling party availed 31 fishing rigs which the President is set to commission soon. The district also got four Zupco buses. “Under the Second Republic we are implementing the devolution policy and resources are being channelled to provinces and districts to enable the people to fund priority projects. We have set aside $42,5 billion to fund devolution projects and programmes. Here in Matabeleland, we have allocated $3,2 billion and that money goes to construction of schools, clinics, dip tanks and other such projects meant to improve the people’s welfare. We have heard that you want a vocational training school and is going to be built soon,” said President Mnangagwa. He said clinics are being built across Binga district so that people do not walk long distances to access health services. “I am told there are no science laboratories and computers. We brought computers for Siabuwa High School. Today we are giving you four brand new Zupco buses. For 20 years tell me what you were given by MDC? We are busy fixing roads through the District Development Fund, they are not leaving the district. We have given them an instruction that at every chief’s homestead there should be a proper road, borehole and solar,” said President Mnangagwa. He said Lupane Provincial Hospital whose construction had failed to take off for many years is shaping up and will be the biggest provincial hospital in the country. President Mnangagwa implored youth to embrace programmes being implemented by the ruling party especially the Presidential Heifer and Fisheries Programme. He made reference to households that are farming at Bubi-Lupane Irrigation Scheme which got $265 000 each last season.
The President once again assured the nation that no one will die of hunger saying as a long-term solution Government is in the third year of constructing dams to boost cultivation of crops under irrigation in order to enhance food security. In Binga plans are under way to construct market places using devolution funds. Matabeleland North Provincial Affairs and Devolution Minister Richard Moyo said the Devolution Agenda has resulted in the implementation of many infrastructure projects in the province. “Binga’s development has been stalled over the years because the electorate voted for the opposition. This is however, set to change as the people of Binga have seen and appreciate the various socio-economic programmes being implemented by the Second Republic. They know that the New Dispensation through Vision 2030 wants to leave no place and no one behind in development,” said Minister Moyo. He said there are various projects such as construction of clinics, hospitals, roads and establishment of piped water schemes that are being implemented to improve the people’s welfare. In agriculture, there has been accelerated development through various interventions including mechanisation, restocking and development of irrigation schemes which have improved the people’s lives. “We appreciate that your Government is availing $400 million to ensure that the implementation of the Bulawayo Kraal Irrigation Scheme project is speeded up and its completion will enable beneficiaries to counter negative effects of climate change,” he said. Minister Moyo said the Emergency Road Rehabilitation Programme has resulted in improvement of the road network and reopening of damaged roads. About US$29,5 million has already been availed by the Second Republic for rehabilitation of some of the major roads in the province particularly state roads linking the seven administrative districts. Some of the main roads being rehabilitated are Bulawayo-Victoria Falls, Kamativi-Binga, Bulawayo-Nkayi-Gokwe and Bulawayo-Tsholotsho. Minister Moyo expressed concern over the growing number of non-governmental organisations operating especially in Binga where they give handouts to villagers thereby promoting a dependency syndrome. — @ncubeleon