The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
THE Zimbabwe University Sports Association (Zusa) cluster 1 games that concluded in the city at the weekend have been described as a huge success. The National University of Science and Technology (Nust) played host to the games that saw 10 universities from around Zimbabwe contest in various sport codes. Some of the codes included athletics, chess, karate, table tennis and hockey. Judith Siziba, who is the Nust director of Sports said the competition had gone beyond their expectations. “Despite a two-year absence due to Covid-19, the ZUSA games were a resounding success. The Games were well organised, thanks to the Nust Local Organising Committee (Loc) and the good support from ZUSA executive. “All the Covid-19 protocols were observed and no incidents were recorded. “Congratulations to all athletes, technical support and administrators.  The host, Nust teams, put up some spirited performances throughout the Games. We look forward to the Cluster 2 Games to be hosted by the University of Zimbabwe next month. “The future of various sporting disciplines in the country is bright given the talent exhibited by the students. We encourage coaches and various teams to use events like ZUSA to identify talent,” said Siziba. University of Zimbabwe came out tops at the games claiming 16 gold medals, 15 silver and nine bronze medals. Bindura University of Science Education was second having accumulated 13 gold medals, four silver and six bronze medals. In third place was Midlands State University with nine gold, 17 silver and five bronze medals. Hosts Nust finished in fourth place with seven gold, seven silver and eight bronze medals. After the Zusa Games, all tertiary institutions will stage the Zimbabwe Tertiary Institution Students’ Union (Zitusu) Games where a squad will be selected to represent Zimbabwe in the World Universities Games. Medals
Gold     Silver     Bronze     Total
UZ     16     15     9     40
Buse     13     4     6     23
MSU     9     17     5     31
Nust     7     7     8     15
Cut     3     1     2     6
LSU     1     1     2     4
Hit     1     1     0     2
GZU     0     3     8     11
Wua     0     0     5     5
AU     0     0     3    3 -@innocentskizoe