The Chronicle Mahlabezulu Zulu
In the ecosystem, each living thing has its niche. The endangered Painted Dog, whose names in vernacular are Iganyana/Mumhi/Mashambo, is one of the enigmatic animals which is rarely seen in wildlife protected areas while it plays a major role in the ecosystem, for example, it kills certain species of animals especially those in the small antelope family like the impala and duiker to control their population in the wild as its prey. The same predator also targets the weak prey during its hunts helping in the evolutionary process of “survival of the fittest”.  Unfortunately, Painted Dog numbers have dwindled because of human activities which include poaching, loss of suitable habitat due to human settlements encroaching wildlife designated areas. Some time back, some commercial farmers used to shoot and kill them suspecting that they kill their livestock especially goats and sheep. Painted Dog Conservation, a conservation project which has become internationally recognised for promoting the species, has also played a vital role in conservation of nature in general. The project, whose heart is a Community Conservation Centre includes a children’s nature bush camp called Iganyana Bush Camp which has four-day well-designed nature interactive activities for children since 2004.  It has brought over 15 000 children to camp to date. The eye-catching visitors’ centre which is close to Hwange National Park Airport has a magnificent interpretive section which markets the park and its painted dogs through an engaging story of one dog called “Eyespot”. It also has a Painted Dog Rehabilitation Centre where injured painted dogs found in the wild are captured, treated and released back into the wild. Over 70 dogs have passed through the facility since 2001. Some have been kept for educational purposes from time to time especially when their injuries are too grave to be left out in the wild to fend for themselves. The conservation project has employed various methods to promote conservation of wildlife in both communities and wildlife protected areas, that is, Hwange National Park and Sikumi Forestry. Through its multifaceted wildlife conservation approach, which includes conservation education programmes, employment opportunities to over 66 staff offered to local community members, anti -poaching units operations, wildlife research, sustainable self-help projects in communities to conserve wildlife, crafts centre establishment and operation and promotion of soccer league, the conservation project has won the hearts of its neighboring communities which have benefited from these programmes through wildlife conservation efforts. Mabale community which is in Dete, under Chief Nelukoba and is the closest to the project’s Community Conservation Education Centre in Sikumi Forestry has witnessed some developmental projects which have been initiated and promoted by the conservation project. Community self-help developmental projects like permaculture gardening, craft making and other conservation linked projects have been established in communities in target communities like Mabale and surrounding communities. The conservation project has also extended its programmes to communities such as Mabale by supporting the health service system by donating an ambulance, and other related equipment to service clinics in these communities. Through working with local leadership, the conservation project has fulfilled most of its conservation goals, that is, reduction of poaching activities in neighbouring wildlife protected through self help projects, sporting and anti-poaching activities involving communities. Wildlife research, interwoven with effective conservation education, and effective community development in communities can assist in saving an endangered animal specie. As such the organisation vision of creating a conducive environment where painted dogs can thrive is hinged on a motto of conservation through action and education.