The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
THE Football Union of Russia (FUR) has taken Fifa and Uefa to the Court of Arbitration for Sport (CAS) following the two bodies’ decision to suspend Russian teams and clubs from participating in competitions organised and run by the two bodies. FUR also wants CAS to stay the execution of the challenged decisions, a move that will see their teams and clubs reinstated in both Fifa and Uefa competitions. Fifa and Uefa suspended Russia on 28 February following Russia’s military operation in Ukraine. “The Court of Arbitration for Sport (CAS) registered earlier today the appeals filed by the Football Union of Russia (FUR) against the decisions taken on 28 February 2022 by the Bureau of the Fifa Council (the Fifa appeal) and the Uefa Executive Committee (the Uefa appeal) (collectively. FUR is challenging the decision to suspend all its teams and clubs from participation in the respective competitions until further notice,” said CAS in a media statement released on Tuesday night. The appeal against Fifa was filed against Fédération Internationale de Football Association (Fifa), the Union of European Football Associations (Uefa), the Polish Football Association, the Swedish Football Association, the Czech Football Association, the Football Association of Montenegro and the Malta Football Association while the appeal against Uefa  has been filed against Uefa, the Hellenic Football Federation, the Belarus Football Federation, the Danish Football Association, the Luxembourgish Football Association, the Austrian.  Football Association, the Malta Football Association, the Portuguese Football Federation, the English Football Association, the Spanish Football Association, the Irish Football Association and the French Football Association.
“In its appeals, the FUR requests CAS to set aside the Challenged Decisions and to reinstate all Russian teams and clubs to participate in Fifa and Uefa competitions. Together with each statement of appeal, the FUR has also filed a request to stay the execution of each challenged decision. The CAS Court Office has initiated two separate arbitration procedures and, in accordance with the Code of Sports-related Arbitration (the arbitration rules governing CAS procedures), will seek the position of the respondent parties with respect to the FUR’s requests to stay the execution of the Challenged Decisions and as to the organization and planning of each arbitration procedure. The CAS anticipates being able to share further information on the proceedings through a media release in a few days’ time once a decision has been issued with respect to the requests for a stay,” read the CAS statement. Russia was due to meet Poland in a Fifa World Cup qualifier playoffs on 24 March  while Spartak Moscow had a date with RB Leipzig in the last 16 of the Europa League.