The Chronicle Lionel Messi says he will reconsider his future in football later this year but said it’s likely “many things will change’’ after the World Cup finals this winter in Qatar. Messi’s comments came after Argentina beat Venezuela 3-0 on Friday in the remaining match of the penultimate round of South American World Cup qualifying. ‘’I don’t know what I will do after the World Cup. I am thinking about what is coming,’’ Messi said. “After Qatar I will have to reassess many things.’’ He added his doubts had nothing to do with past frustration playing for Argentina. He won his first title with the team last year — the Copa America in a final against Brazil.  ‘’It has been a while that I am happy here, since before winning the Copa. I am thankful for all this they make me feel every time I come to Argentina,’’ Messi said. Asked about him continuing with the national team after Qatar, Messi, who turns 35 in June, said: ‘’I don’t know, the truth is I don’t know. I think about what is coming, which is close, Ecuador (tomorrow). The preparation matches in June and September. ‘’Let’s hope these go the best way possible. But for sure after the World Cup many things will change.’’ Messi has suffered some woes recently at club level after failing to meet expectations at PSG after his move last summer and was recently booed by his fans. But he was in better spirits on international duty and appeared pleased after scoring the third goal of the match on Friday and receiving enthusiastic support from the spectators at the La Bombonera Stadium in Buenos Aires. Brazil, Argentina, Ecuador and Uruguay have already secured the region’s four direct spots in Qatar later this year. Peru, Colombia and Chile will play in the last round tomorrow for fifth place, which qualifies for an international playoff with an Asian team. Argentina opened the scoring with Nico Gonzalez from close range in the 35th minute after a low cross by Rodrigo de Paul. Angel di Maria, another player who is under fire in France, netted the second in the 79th minute, lobbing the Venezuelan goalkeeper after an assist by De Paul. Messi and Brazil star Neymar have both faced criticism in France after their club’s loss to Real Madrid in the round of 16 of the Champions League. — Mailonline