The Chronicle Mashudu Netsianda, Senior Reporter
THE country’s national beef cattle herd recorded a marginal growth of 0,6 percent from 5 478 648 cattle in 2020 to 5 509 983 in 2021 while the cattle mortality rate declined from 11,1 percent in 2020 to 8,86 percent in 2021. The decline in mortality rate follows interventions by the Government through the $500 million Presidential Tick Grease Blitz programme, which was launched by President Mnangagwa last November 2020 coupled with good pastures. Livestock diseases are the major cause of beef cattle, sheep and goat mortalities. Government is already upgrading the Presidential Tick Grease Programme and intensifying the Dip Tank Rehabilitation Programme. The grease is being distributed to farmers to curb the spread of tick-borne diseases, particularly January Disease. The disease is common between December and March and is spread through the bite of the brown ear tick.  Under the scheme, each farmer is getting 1kg of the grease and they have to produce a stock card to get the chemical. Over one million cattle farmers across the country received free dipping chemicals, while 4 000 dip tanks countrywide were rehabilitated to curb the spread of tick-borne diseases. The tick grease programme is in line with the National Development Strategy 1 (NDS1), which prioritises animal health and production through strengthening farmer knowledge, skills in livestock production and health, to enhance productivity. Government, cognisant of the fact that the livestock sector has to be run as a business to ensure that it makes significant contribution to Zimbabwe’s socio-economic growth, crafted a number of national blueprints, namely, the NDS1, the Agriculture and Food Systems Transformation Strategy and the Livestock Growth Plan (2020-2025). The Livestock Growth Plan, which seeks to grow the livestock sector to a US$1,9 billion economy by 2025, was approved by the Cabinet in August 2020. Key strategies of the Livestock Growth Plan entail the following components: improvement in animal nutrition; genetics improvement; improvement in animal health; climate change adaptation and small stock production; development of markets and trade infrastructure; and resource mobilisation. Livestock production in Zimbabwe is an important source of income and a safety net for millions of people, particularly rural women and youth, and is a significant contributor to agricultural GDP. However, the prolonged dry spell due to climate change is now affecting agricultural production and there are now fears that the pastures will soon get depleted. Matabeleland South provincial livestock officer, Mr Hatitye Muchemwa said there was a marginal growth in terms of livestock production in the province. He attributed that to rejuvenation of pastures and availability of water at most sources across the province. Mr Muchemwa said despite good pastures and water, farmers should always be on guard against the effects of climate change. “We had small growth in terms of livestock largely because of an improvement in our browsing and grazing situation and water situation. Last year, the season was good and so far, the pastures are good, but with this prolonged dry spell it will likely result in the depletion of our pastures going forward,” he said. Matabeleland South, whose economic mainstay hinges on livestock production, has 657 000 cattle. Matabeleland North provincial veterinary officer Dr Polex Moyo was not available for comment while the provincial Agricultural Technical and Extension Services Department (Agritex) officer Mr Dumisani Nyoni said he would provide information in due course. In her post-Cabinet briefing on Tuesday, Information, Publicity and Broadcasting Services Minister Monica Mutsvangwa said the first round of crop and livestock survey confirmed that climate change is affecting agricultural production. She said there was an increase in the national small ruminants and pig population as follows: goats (7,1 percent), sheep (2 percent), and pigs (13 percent). “Cabinet advises that broiler breeders grew by 9 percent, day-old chicks by 19 percent, and broiler meat production increased by 17 percent. Livestock diseases are the major cause of beef cattle, sheep and goat mortalities,” said Minister Mutsvangwa. The national dairy milk production increased by 3,8 percent from 76 695 157 litres in 2020 to 79 605 552 litres in 2021. Minister Mutsvangwa said 790 317 stockowners benefited from 1 000 000 kg/tick grease distributed under the Presidential Blitz Tick programme. “Furthermore, about 710 heifers were distributed under the Presidential Heifer Pass-on Scheme to youth and are kept at 10 provincial youth incubation hubs that have been established across the country,” she said. — @mashnetsEnds