The Chronicle Algeria will lock horns with Cameroon in the 2022 Fifa World Cup qualification —third-round — match at the Mustapha Tchaker Stadium in Blida today.  Kick-off is at 9:30pm CAT. The Desert Foxes pulled off a near-perfect coup on Friday with a 1-0 victory in Cameroon in the first-leg encounter with Islam Slimani’s 40th-minute goal inspiring the visitors to a win. Algeria are in control of this tie and they will look to avoid a defeat in order to qualify for the World Cup finals in Qatar in what would be their fifth appearance in the biggest sporting event in the world. The North African giants defeated Cameroon for the first time since 1995 and Desert Foxes captain Riyad Mahrez has cautioned his teammates ahead of the second-leg clash. “We don’t think it is over. We won with a lot of desire. There is a second game in Blida under different circumstances,” Mahrez told Dzballon. “Nothing is played, everything remains open. I had seen the statistics before the game. I think we were 100 percent ready. Records are made to be broken. “Even the Japoma [Stadium], I heard a lot about it. We love this stadium.” Meanwhile, Cameroon are on the back foot following their disappointing loss to Desert Foxes in their own backyard and they now have a mammoth task at hand. Having qualified seven times for the Fifa World Cup finals, more than any other African team, the Indomitable Lions will have to find a way to secure a win in Algeria in order to book their spot in the 2022 edition. Rigobert Song, who took charge of his first competitive game as the Cameroon head coach against the Desert Foxes, has made it clear that they will be going for a win in North Africa. “I can’t change things in three days or four days, I do what is necessary, I’m a competitor, you have to stay positive. The qualification could be with [Algeria].” Song told DZ Foot. “Algeria did not come to play. Our players were there to play, our goal was to play. Football, if you put seven people behind it, it’s complicated.” “In Blida, we will try to put Algeria in difficulty. I will go there for the qualification.” The last time Algeria played host to Cameroon was in October 2016. The two teams played to a 1-1 draw in the 2018 World Cup qualifier which was played at the Mustapha Tchaker Stadium. — ©Backpage TXT