The Chronicle Kumbirai  Alfayi/Michael Magoronga, Midlands Reporters
The Ministry of Youth, Sport, Art and Recreation, the National Arts Council of Zimbabwe (NACZ) and artistes from the Midlands have united to host a fundraising birthday bash for Bob Nyabinde in Kwekwe on Saturday.  Nyabinde, one of the finest musicians to emerge from Kwekwe is turning 67 today. The artiste who is popularly known as the Headmaster was forced into retirement from the music business after succumbing to blindness due to his diabetic condition. Sulu Chimbetu will headline the gala taking place at The Lit with more performances expected from Selmor and Tendai Manatsa, Peter Moyo, Zig Zag band, Victor Kunonga, Agga Nyabinde, Obert Moyo and Leonard Zhakata. From the Midlands front, Kilamani, Bantuman I, Terry, Trevor the One and 2Nice Band are some of the artistes expected to perform. Minister Kirsty Coventry is expected to grace the occasion. The Midlands Youth, Sport, Arts and Recreation promotions officer Reward Shockson said the Government will do everything possible to assist Nyabinde in line with available policies. “This is a themed event that has since earned itself a national status owing to the unity of Zimbabwean artistes who felt the need to collaborate in this manner,” Shockson said. “As a Government ministry responsible for the creative sector, we are committed to recognising and meaningfully supporting artistes during their lifetime.” He said the event will be in two parts. “We are going to have it in two parts. We will first gather at King Solomon’s Hotel where we will have the speeches and other formalities in the afternoon. We will then move to The Lit where we will have the gala where musicians will be playing one after the other,” said Shockson. He said tickets to the gala will range from US$3 to US$5 adding all proceeds will be channelled to Nyabinde’s family and will assist in buying medication for the music icon. “This was an idea that  came the artistes who said they wanted to celebrate the life of their icon given all the contribution he made to the creative industry. He has not been well lately and needs support from other artistes, this is the way we are honouring our legend,” Shockson said. The hosting of the Nyabinde birthday bash coincides with plans by the Arts Ministry to support legends and families of such personalities, at least two per district across the Midlands province. “We are planning to support our artistes and hopefully families left by legends so that we help them maintain their dignity and honour, a privilege they deserve in return for the hard work of our musicians,” he said. Midlands province is home to several legends, among them, visual artist Forbes Mushipe, former Super Sounds guitarist Alex Sekela, Joseph “Man Soul Jah” Nhara, Robson Kaitano and families left by the late Paul Matavire, Tongai Moyo and Leonard Dembo. NACZ provincial arts manager Farai Kupfavira said all is in place to ensure that the event meets everyone’s expectations. “We’ve engaged several stakeholders to support and make the event a reality. On our part as organisers, we did everything needed and expected of us as a regulator,” Kupfavira said.