The Chronicle Thupeyo Muleya, Beitbridge Bureau 
Parliament’s Public Accounts Committee (PAC) yesterday challenged Government to capacitate local authorities countrywide so that they can improve on service delivery, especially on management of solid waste. The PAC is conducting verification visits to solid waste management sites run by local authorities. After inspecting progress on the Beitbridge Municipality’s compliance project yesterday, committee chairman, Mr Brian Dube said it was apparent that councils with their low revenue streams, cannot manage to construct high capital infrastructural developments including standard engineered landfills. “We have also noted with concern the delays by the Ministry of Local Government in approving the necessary legal instruments (by-laws) to capacitate local authorities to enforce environmentally friendly laws among others,” said Mr Dube. “After we conclude our verifications, we will then sit down and draft a report and recommendations. Additionally, you will note that although progress has been made in compliance with the Auditor General’s 2018 reports, there are still some grey areas, which need central Government and the corporate world to step in and help these councils”.  The legislator said with respect to Beitbridge Municipality, it has made remarkable progress in terms of addressing refuse collection, procurement of equipment and community engagement. He said the council was still waiting for feedback from the Local Government Ministry concerning the pending approval of 14 by-laws, eight of which are related to the environment, health, natural resources, and solid waste management. “The Auditor General’s report (2018) indicates that there were no plans (in Beitbridge) at that time towards recycling, and to deal with waste management in high traffic areas,” he said. The committee also encouraged local authorities to use devolution funds to improve service delivery in their areas of jurisdiction. He said local authorities must not engage in wasteful expenditure at the expense of providing people-centred service delivery. “At times their activities leave one wondering if they really lack resources or it’s an issue of lack of intention,” said Mr Dube.
Beitbridge’s Environmental Health Officer, Mr Pio Muchena said the local authority had started complying with some of the issues contained in the report. He said they had increased their refuse collection fleet, created ward waste management committees and clubs, erected over 150 refuse bins along the major highway and key roads. Mr Muchena said they had also identified two areas to house a temporary dumpsite and a standard engineered landfill. — @tupeyo