The Chronicle Lumbidzani Dima, Chronicle Reporter
SENATORS have raised concern over the poor state of the Bulawayo-Victoria Falls road. During a debate in the Senate on Tuesday, Matabeleland North Senator Sikhanyisiwe Mpofu said appealed for Government intervention in the rehabilitation of the road. She said the state of the Bulawayo-Victoria Falls Road has been worsened by coal trucks. “I am really disappointed because most of our roads have been damaged mainly by heavy trucks which use these roads. The Bulawayo-Victoria Falls Road has been damaged a lot by trucks which carry coal every day. What surprises me is that Victoria Falls has been awarded a city status, but the road that links Bulawayo and Victoria Falls has a lot of potholes and it is not drivable. For a trip that used to take four hours, now you take more than that because of the potholes on the road,” she said. “The road that stretches from Tsholotsho to Bulawayo is also bad. We expect that this road will be repaired because it is one of those roads that have been damaged a lot. We used to travel for an hour from Tsholotsho to Victoria Falls, but as of now, it takes four hours due to the bad state of the road. Our farmers and travellers are struggling a lot because the road is not good at all. I appeal that Government intervenes so that they can repair the roads because I believe that the Government is the one that is responsible for repairing roads so that people can be able to travel easily.” Harare Senator Omega Sipani-Hungwe commended Government for rehabilitating roads despite having many roads still in poor states. “Government is doing its level best. Our roads are now in good shape like the Harare-Beitbridge Road. It is very good. It is not yet complete, but it is a good road now. What I am saying is that let us give credit where it is due and thank the Government for a job well done. “In the urban areas, we have good cars, but our vehicles are being damaged because of the many potholes. I do not know whether the local authorities are not collecting revenue from the ratepayers. I also heard that ZINARA also gives them money. I think they should speed up the repairs so that they mend the potholes. Too many potholes are a hazard as they cause accidents,” he said. Zinara recently released $17 billion for road rehabilitation works in all provinces. The funds will be disbursed under the Government’s ongoing Emergency Road Rehabilitation Programme (ERRP), which has scored major success in restoring sound road infrastructure since its inception in 2021. “I also want to thank the Government for intervening in urban areas by fixing the roads. They have taken charge as they are repairing the major roads in the cities.  “If the Government is taking care of the major roads, councils should now go into the residential areas especially in high density areas because those roads need urgent attention. Our councils should look for equipment so that they maintain the roads so that people travel well,” said Sen Sipani-Hungwe.