The Chronicle Mkhululi Ncube, Chronicle Reporter
MORE action is needed to reduce the burden women face due to climate change in the country as they are the more affected than men, an official has said. Action Aid Zimbabwe country director Mr Joy Mabenge said this during Matabeleland North Provincial International Women’s Day belated commemorations which were held at Nhlekisa Village in Nkayi District on Thursday.  The month of March is recognised worldwide as Women’s Month and March 8 has been designated as International Women’s Day. This year’s celebrations are being held under the theme: “Gender Equality today for a sustainable tomorrow.” The theme seeks to highlight challenges of sustainability as a result of Climate change. “Globally, women are increasingly being recognised as more are vulnerable to climate change impacts than men, as they constitute the majority of the world’s poor and are more dependent on the natural resources which climate change threatens the most. Coming closer home, Zimbabwe has been operating in a humanitarian context since Cyclone Idai devastated the Eastern Highlands in 2019, this was followed by recurrent droughts and floods in the eastern and western parts of the country caused by climate change. Covid-19 compounded the situation further as it affected access to basic goods and services by the marginalised and those living in poverty,” he said. “Women, as the primary caregivers in the home are by far, more affected by the adverse effects of the catastrophes we have encountered over the past three years. This calls for urgent action in strengthening women’s resilience to these shocks through promotion of agro-ecological practices and women-led humanitarian response to disasters.” Mr Mabenge called for more support towards climate change financing that will enable communities to be resilient to the impacts of climate change. He said programmes that focus on smart agriculture and agro-ecology can assist communities to build resilience and withstand shocks resulting from climate change. Speaking during the same occasion, Women Affairs, Community, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Minister, Dr Sithembiso Nyoni in a speech read on her behalf by Matabeleland North provincial development officer, Mr Masauso Phiri raised concern that women are not involved in decision making when it comes to climate change. The minister said women from rural areas were highly dependent on local natural resources for their livelihoods which are being affected by climate change. “The difference between men and women’s interaction with the environment and natural resources implies that their vulnerability differs. It is, therefore, imperative to make gender considerations in climate, disaster risk reduction and environment conservation strategies. “Women have limited accesses to and control of resources, environmental goods and services, they have negligible participation in decision making, and are not involved in the distribution of environmental benefits. Consequently, women are less able to confront climate change. “During extreme weather such as droughts, cyclones and floods, women tend to work more to restore and secure the household livelihoods. This will leave less time for women to access training and education, develop skills or participate in economic mainstream, thus gender equality remains low,” said Minister Nyoni. The minister said her ministry has supported the establishment of solar powered community gardens in eight rural provinces to help them adapt to climate change through the Zimbabwe Community Development Fund. She said Government will continue to avail funding to assist women in the country. “In 2022 the ministry intends to fund 25 women projects in all the seven districts in Matabeleland North Province under the Women Development Fund and 20 under Zimbabwe Community Development Fund. Funding is also available from the Zimbabwe Women’s Bank,” she said. — @themkhust