The Chronicle Leonard Ncube in Victoria Falls GOVERNMENT is committed to addressing gender inequalities and upholding human rights while promoting peace and reconciliation as it believes this is key to creating an enabling environment for development. In his welcome remarks at a United Nations (UN) strategic planning retreat in Victoria Falls on Monday, Matabeleland North Provincial Affairs and Devolution Minister, Richard Moyo Government is committed to creating an enabling environment for development hence it was addressing issues of inequalities and respect for human rights. “The Government of Zimbabwe is committed to addressing gender inequalities and upholding human rights while promoting peace and reconciliation to create an enabling environment for development,” said Minister Moyo. He commended the UN agencies for funding community resilience programmes around the country. The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), for instance, is implementing a number of programmes covering Binga, Nkayi and Umguza in Matabeleland North, which have uplifted people’s lives. “The Government of Zimbabwe values the work of the UN agencies in the country and we use this occasion to thank you for the strong and reliable partnerships in pursuit of our development goals.  You are having this retreat at the right time as we are just rolling out the implementation of the Co-operation Framework between the UN and Zimbabwe, which aligns well with our National Development Strategy (NDS1), which is being implemented as part of our Vision 2030 agenda,” said Minister Moyo. He said Matabeleland North province’s seven districts which are Binga, Bubi, Hwange, Lupane, Nkayi, Tsholotsho and Umguza with a combined population of about 700 000 people, are all prone to droughts. He said food security can only be guaranteed in the province if farmers are able to grow crops under irrigation. “We are grateful as a province that the UNDP is funding some of the projects to enhance food security thereby improving livelihoods of our people,” said Minister Moyo. He said this was in line with the President Mnangagwa’s mantra that no place and no one should be left behind in development. In Nkayi and Umguza, UNDP is funding Melana projects that promote resilience building. “The projects include the establishment of piped water schemes, seedbanks and the rehabilitation of diptanks. In Binga UNDP is supporting institutions that offer micro-credit support for women and the establishment of crop and livestock centres among other projects. I hope the good relations with the province will continue and the UNDP will consider expanding its funding of resilience building initiatives to benefit more people,” said Minister Moyo. He said Zimbabwe continues to experience economic challenges as a result of the economic disruptions caused by the Covid-19 pandemic and the illegal sanctions imposed on the country by western countries. Meanwhile, Minister Moyo has urged Zimbabweans to remain peaceful ahead of the Saturday by-elections. “As our country looks forward to the holding of by-elections, I want to use this occasion to convey the message from His Excellency President Mnangagwa that we must remain peaceful and respect the rule of law,” he said. — @ncubeleon