The Chronicle Patrick Chitumba, Midlands Bureau Chief
THE $35 million Mapfungautsi Polyclinic funded by devolution money, has opened its doors to the public following its commissioning on Monday. The polyclinic will service Gokwe South and some parts of Gokwe North where people were travelling up to 140 kilometers to access antenatal services in Kwekwe. The health institution has four female wards and an equal number of male wards, three postnatal rooms, a section for antenatal care and an out-patients’ department. The clinic is expected to service about 11 000 people from the two districts. The clinic is one of the many projects meant to improve the people’s lives that have been funded by devolution money. There was pomp and funfair in the usually sleepy Mapfungautsi suburb as the clinic was commissioned in the presence of chiefs, Njelele, Mutendi, Chireya and Sayi from the two districts as well as Gokwe town councillors and officials. In his address, Midlands Provincial Affairs and Devolution Minister Larry Mavima said the clinic was a clear testimony of the successes of Devolution under the Second Republic led by President Mnangagwa.  “This polyclinic was built in response to the ever-increasing demand for health care services in the two districts of Gokwe. It is indeed a great honour and privilege for me to be part of the commissioning of this important health facility in Gokwe town’s Ward Four,” he said. Minister Mavima commended Gokwe town council for implenting projects meant to uplift the people’s living standards which is in line with Vision 2030. He said Government has lined up more development projects for both Gokwe South and North districts  in line with the National Development Strategy (NDS1). Minister Mavima called on the council and other stakeholders to embrace the vision of establishing a textile industry and value chain in Gokwe town. He said the two districts of Gokwe were cotton producing areas and as such there was abundant raw materials to establish a textile industry in Gokwe town. “We need to value add our cotton so that we create jobs and grow our economy here in Gokwe instead of exporting jobs to other towns,” said Minister Mavima. He said council on its part should avail land for investors that want to establish textile factories. Minister Mavima said as an incentive for investors, council should push for the town to be declared a textile Special Economic Zone (SEZ). “We want our cotton to be processed here and move out as finished products that bring in more money compared to exporting raw cotton,” he said. Addressing the same gathering, Gokwe Town Council chairperson Councillor Never Gwanzura said the polyclinic will greatly improve health care services in the town. “A healthy population is crucial for the realisation of economic growth and the achievement of an upper middle-income society by 2030,” he said.