The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Reporter
GOSPEL outfit Vocal Extraordinaire (Vocal Ex) will next week break their two-year hiatus when they finally host their “Vocal Ex Live in Concert”. The concert which had been initially pencilled for May 25 in 2020 was cancelled after arts activities were put on hold when the country went into lockdown due to the Covid-19 pandemic. Now that things are beginning to normalise, the group has rescheduled the show that will be staged at the Bulawayo Amphitheatre on April 2. It is expected to start at 3pm with an array of artistes who include Mai Mwamuka, iWorship, One Spirit, Adrian Kaputen and Jacob Song and Ready Hearts set to take to the stage. Vocal Ex leader Thembelani Mdlaziba said putting the event on hold for two years was a blessing in disguise as it gave them ample time to polish up their act. He said the show will also serve as a reunion gig. “Our event will be a pre-Easter music fellowship where we’ll reunite and celebrate with fans from Bulawayo at large as the city has really supported us. It’s a long-awaited reunion gig that a lot have been asking for,” said Mdlaziba. He said they are looking forward to the event as it has been a while since they performed for the public, although they have been performing at private events. “Our last public performance was in December 2019 in Victoria Falls. Notably, though, we’ve featured at private events, be it as guests or stage collaborations.  In December last year, we held a limited seats Live DVD Recording at Family of God Church which is due to be released mid-year.” Quizzed if Covid-19 affected them, Mdlaziba said their closeness as a group of 36 members kept them going. “We’re a very close neat family and that’s the foundation of what inspired and carried us through the difficult time that everyone went through. We conducted a lot of virtual rehearsals and interactions, and always updated our social media platforms to keep in touch with our followers. And when it permitted, we met and practised, thereby inspiring each other to stay focused,” said Mdlaziba.
He said the past two years were used to reflect as the group took time to introspect as a team. This year, Mdlaziba said looks very promising as they have a number of concerts that were cancelled that they are hoping to revive. “We have a number of concerts that were cancelled or postponed, as well as a couple of sets in the region and a maiden international one. It’s our desire to reactivate them as borders have reopened. “Our biggest mission this year will be the release of our long-awaited DVD which will also mark the birth of the new Vocal Ex generation of musicians. This is a generation that has set up a standard of their own from inspiration from the pioneers that set a mark with a debut album that we launched at our inception in 2016.” The hosting of the forthcoming concert, Mdlaziba said will definitely be an experience to remember. “The team has grown in number and stature, with matured sound and freshness of an inspired new generation. It’ll be a tale of growth, something that we thank God for,” he said. The alumni, Mdlaziba said will be present at the concert to cement the unity of the gospel outfit. “On the day, the very first of our founding members, Nokuthula Sithole aka Noxy will be with us and we are excited. It’ll be epic from the start to the very end and it’s definitely a concert not to miss. ” – @mthabisi_mthire