The Chronicle Leonard Ncube in Victoria Falls
THE Zimbabwe Parks and Wildlife Management Authority (Zimparks) has entered into partnership with a local helicopter flights company to offer services for tourists keen to view game and the majestic Victoria Falls. MJ Air is a wholly indigenous company operating from Kazungula aerodrome on the outskirts of Victoria Falls, from where the activities will be taking place. For Zimparks the partnership is about creating synergies and getting the much-needed revenue, which the wildlife authority desperately needs for its operations. While helicopter flights are not new, it is the combination of aerial game view and fly past the majestic Victoria Falls waterfall and gorges that makes the new product unique.  Already there is Zambezi Helicopter Company, Bonisair and Chikopokopo that are offering 15-minute helicopter flights in Victoria Falls. Environment, Climate, Tourism and Hospitality Industry Minister Nqobizitha Mangaliso Ndlovu who officiated at the launch of the partnership in Victoria Falls on Wednesday, said the business partnership forms part of the enablers to realising Vision 2030. “This is the birth of a new entrant on the tourism industry, the MJ Air in partnership with Zimparks. As part of our ministry’s goals and objective, we have been encouraging such partnerships,” he said. “This is a 100 percent indigenous and proudly run and operated by Zimbabweans. Such business partnerships form part of the enablers to achieve Vision 2030.” Although Covid-19 has adversely affected the tourism industry, partnerships are some of the strategies to ensure domestic tourism recovery. As such, Minister Ndlovu said helicopter activities would help contribute to revenue generation and providing opportunity for tourists to view Victoria Falls and National Park from the air. “What we are witnessing today is not only the birth of a new entrant but an immediate impact on employment. I would like to applaud MJ Air for recruiting largely locals,” he said.  “I challenge domestic tourists to find time to explore this kind of experience.” MJ Air operations director, Mr Gerald Zumbika, said the new service combines flying over the falls and game park.
Victoria Falls is surrounded by Chamabondo, Victoria Falls and Zambezi National Parks. “MJ is a proudly owned Zimbabwean company run and managed by locals in partnership with Zimparks. The partnership started in 2020 and rides on building of infrastructure in the tourism facilities,” he said. “Ours is a game view as well as appreciation of the upper Zambezi as we approach the Falls. We do 30 minutes of a combination of game flights on the outbound and inbound as we go back to landing.” Currently, MJ Air has employed 16 youths. Zimparks director general, Mr Fulton Mangwanya, said the partnership is a culmination of an enormous collective effort. “This partnership is coming at a time when Zimparks is making efforts to raise as much revenue as it can to support its mandate of conserving our wildlife,’ he said. “As you may be aware that Zimparks relies on revenue that it generates for all its operations. Thus, we eat what we kill.”
Matabeleland North director for local governance, Mr Tapera Mugoriya, who was representing Minister of State for Provincial Affairs and Devolution, Richard Moyo, said the province prides itself for being the country’s tourism capital. Victoria Falls City Town Clerk, Mr Ronnie Dube, said more tourism products and activities will widen the local authority’s revenue base as residents will get jobs and pay rates. — @ncubeleon