The Chronicle Angela Sibanda, Chronicle Reporter
FOUR people died while 13 got injured in accidents that occurred in Bulawayo Metropolitan Province over the Easter and Independence holidays.  Police statistics have revealed that a total of 57 accidents occurred in Bulawayo over the four days of celebrations that started last Friday, which was Good Friday up to Monday when the city hosted Independence Day celebrations. Bulawayo provincial police spokesperson Inspector Abednico Ncube said the number of accidents over the Easter weekend was concerning considering that the city is yet to host the Zimbabwe International Trade Fair (ZITF). “We have recorded 57 accidents that occurred from last Friday up to Monday this week. Of the 57 accidents, 50 were minor accidents, three were serious accidents and four were fatal accidents in which a person died in each while 13 sustained injuries. “The main causes of these accidents were speeding which led to loss of control and failure to observe regulations. The number of accidents is very worrying and for Bulawayo, the holidays are not yet over as we will be hosting the Zitf next week, where we expect more people and more activity in the city. We are therefore appealing to motorists to exercise extreme caution and to fully apply themselves, realizing the importance of following road regulations,” said Inspector Ncube. Zimbabwe as a whole has recorded a number of accidents during this Easter weekend and Independence Day.
Manicaland Province recorded the  highest number of fatalities where a hired St Charles Luwanga bus with 106 passengers crashed, 5km from Jopa turn off along the Chimanimani-Chipinge Road last Thursday night leading to the death of 38 Zion Christian Church (ZCC) members. Zimbabwe’s official road traffic death rate rose from 1 836 in 2016 to an average of 2 000 fatalities per year between 2017 and 2019, averaging more than five deaths per day, according to the Traffic Safety Council of Zimbabwe (TSCZ).  According to a recent United States report, the World Health Organization estimates that the true figure could be three times higher. TD