The Chronicle Michael Magoronga recently in Harare 
THE media has been described as key in educating the public on Sexual and Reproductive Health and Gender Based Violence (SRH/GBV) in the country.  Speaking during a workshop in the capital recently, United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) country representative, Dr Esther Muia said media personalities need to be equipped with SRH/GBV information which helps them articulate the issues from an informed position hence a need for more training sessions for journalists on the subject. She said the media was very critical in the work her organisation and others are doing to curb the scourge. “As the media you are a very important part of the work we are doing on GBV prevention and violence. It is therefore, important that once in a while we engage with you in the way we are doing today,” she said. She urged the media to continue to play its informative and educative role in ending the scourge. “As the media let us hold hands and work together towards the elimination of GBV in our society, use your powerful pens to raise awareness in your communities about this pandemic and clearly highlight where survivors can access services,” said Dr Muia. “GBV and maternal mortality remains a huge problem in Zimbabwe,” she said. “At the heart of our mandate is ending maternal deaths in Zimbabwe and ensuring that no woman dies while giving life. Although there are signs of a decline, the number remains unacceptably high. On the other hand, cases of GBV remain high and remain a problem in the country.” Lead trainer, Ms Mirriam Sibanda urged journalists to take note of the language used in their articles or broadcasts as it may cause more harm than good. “This is a very sensitive topic which requires journalists to be mindful of the use of language as it might result in more harm than good. If you fail to articulate your issue, the audience might end up denoting something else which is not intended,” said Ms Sibanda. Japanese Ambassador to Zimbabwe, Satoshi Tanaka who also graced the occasion, said cases of GBV were real in Zimbabwe, adding that they derail economic development and prosperity. “I was shocked to learn that the threat of GBV is real and ever-present for women and the girls in Zimbabwe and that one in four Zimbabwean women have experienced such violence. Lack of equality, including lack of SRH services and GBV, hinders Zimbabwe’s greatest resources,” he said. Ambassador Tanaka said Japan will continue to assist Zimbabwe to achieve a gender equal society. The government of Japan has been supporting UNFPA since 2012, through a project “Reducing Maternal Mortality in Zimbabwe; Increasing Access Skilled Attendance at birth”, which has seen the purchase of ambulances, and revitalisation of maternity homes across the country. Currently, Japan is providing support to improve the provision of maternal health care services within the context of Covid-19, specifically strengthening the referral system and ensuring the continuity of assisted delivery care in Harare and Bulawayo. The workshop, which was attended by journalists drawn from across the country, saw editors taking turns to highlight challenges they are facing in newsrooms in reporting such issues. The workshop was organised by the Zimbabwe Union of Journalists (ZUJ) in partnership with UNFPA and Government of Japan among other partners. ZUJ president Michael Chideme said, depending on funding, the training is expected to be rolled out to all corners of the country so that it benefits as many journalists as possible. This comes as the Government, led by President Mnangagwa and First Lady Amai Auxilia Mnangagwa has declared war against GBV and child marriages which have rattled the country. Engagements with women, men, chiefs and survivors are some of the programmes undertaken to rid the country of the scourge.