The Chronicle FIFA hs confirmed the seedings for the World Cup draw while publishing new world rankings. England, who will be in Pot 1 for today’s draw, have consolidated fifth place, while Brazil overtook Belgium in top spot. The new rankings were published yesterday ahead of Fifa’s annual congress and following the final round of North American qualifiers for a World Cup, which has caused controversy like no other in recent history. Wales and Scotland’s run of results have seen them both move up the table to 18th and 39th place respectively, and the home nations could clash in one of the three remaining play-offs worldwide to book a place in Qatar. If Scotland progress through their postponed semi-final clash with Ukraine, Steve Clarke ‘s men will go on to face Wales in Cardiff for Europe’s last ticket. A similar situation on the other side of world sees Australia and the United Arab Emirates battle it out to play Peru in an intercontinental decider, as Costa Rica also play host to New Zealand in June’s third play-off. On Wednesday, Mexico and the United States were the final two teams to qualify for this year’s World Cup, which takes place between in November and December. They will join Cristiano Ronaldo ‘s Portugal and the Robert Lewandowski-led Poland, who qualified alongside five teams from Africa via dramatic play-off finals on Tuesday. Since the full-time whistles blew, Fifa has been able to determine which nations will be seeded in each pot today. Notably missing play-off casualties and European champions Italy, Pot 1 will contain hosts Qatar, five-time winners Brazil, Belgium, holders France, Argentina, England, Spain and Portugal, all sides who will be hoping to lift the famous trophy on December 18. Pot 2 then takes the next eight teams from the world rankings which are Mexico, the Netherlands, Denmark, Germany, Uruguay, Switzerland, the United States and Croatia. Two standouts from that bunch are the Netherlands and Germany, a pair of footballing giants with history in the competition. Denmark are also many’s dark horses after their impressive Euro 2020 campaign and the emotional return of Christian Eriksen, with Qatar World Cup ambassador David Beckham tipping them to continue their good form in his early predictions. Pot 3 sees countries whose primary objective will be to qualify from their groups; Senegal, Iran, Japan, Morocco, Serbia, Poland, South Korea and Tunisia. And finally, Pot 4 will remain undecided until June, with Cameroon, Canada, Ecuador, Saudi Arabia and Ghana waiting on Wales or Scotland/Ukraine, Peru or Australia/the United Arab Emirates and Costa Rica or New Zealand. There are, however, a number of important stipulations in today’s draw, which will map out each country’s route to the final.  As always, one team from the four pots will be in each group. Five of the eight groups in total can have a maximum of two European teams due to 13 qualifying, the most of any continent. But beyond that, there cannot be more than one team from any other confederation. As an example, the United States are unable to play Mexico or any other CONCACAF opponents until the knockout rounds, while Brazil would also have to wait for the likes of Argentina from their South America rivals. World Cup draw seedings in full Pot 1: Qatar, Brazil, Belgium,
France, Argentina, England, Spain, Portugal Pot 2: Mexico, The Netherlands, Denmark, Germany, Uruguay, Switzerland, The United States, Croatia Pot 3: Senegal, Iran, Japan, Morocco, Serbia, Poland, South Korea, Tunisia Pot 4: Cameroon, Canada, Ecuador, Saudi Arabia, Ghana, Wales or Scotland/Ukraine, Costa Rica or New Zealand, Peru or Australia/the United Arab Emirates
– Mirror Football