The Chronicle Nqobile Bhebhe, Senior Business Reporter
THE Hwange Local Board (HLB) has availed $35 million to finance construction of 262 flea market stalls and other support facilities for small to medium enterprise operators.  The project, due to start next month, is funded from the Devolution Funds as the local board moves towards formalising the sector. There has been growing concern by the business community in Hwange over the sprouting of unlicensed backyard shops since the advent of Covid-19. Formalised flea markets are a way of regularising these activities. Under the National Development Strategy (NDS1) blueprint and the SMEs Policy 2020-2024, workspace provision is one of the key strategies for supporting SMEs to realise Vision 2030. HLB public relation officer, Mr Dumisani Nsingo, told Business Chronicle that three areas under its jurisdiction, Baobab, Chibondo and Empumalanga had no flea markets at the moment, a development that was encouraging illegal vending. The construction of the state-of-the-art flea market is, thus, in-line with Government’s thrust of creating an enabling environment for SMEs to operate from, Mr Nsingo said. The Government has long pointed out that local authorities have an important role to play in assisting the growth of SMEs. “Currently there is no flea market in our area of jurisdiction, which encompasses Baobab, Chibondo and Empumalanga suburbs and that’s the reason we have planned to construct one,” Mr Nsingo said. The only available flea markets in Hwange urban are situated at Hwange Colliery Company concession area. “We are looking forward to constructing a state-of-the-art flea market through utilisation of the Devolution Fund. The facility is estimated to cost about ZW$35 million. “The flea market will comprise 262 stalls, five booth shops, a kiosk, food court and ablutions as well as an outside car parking area. We expect to start construction in May”, said Mr Nsingo. He said a survey around HLB’s area of jurisdiction shows that at least one in every three households is involved in informal trading. — @nqobilebhebhe