The Chronicle Thandeka Moyo-Ndlovu, Senior Reporter
“LIVING in an independent country like Zimbabwe means we can now participate across the economy without stigma and discrimination, which our forefathers suffered”. These words were echoed by a young Bulawayo entrepreneur, Mr Nkosana Mazibisa, from Lobengula suburb.  He will join thousands of Zimbabweans in celebrating 42 years of independence from colonial rule on April 18, a day he says is of value even to the younger generation often referred to as ama2000s. The 33-year-old entrepreneur believes Independence Day events speak a lot to the identity of Zimbabweans and should be celebrated by every citizen especially youths who never bore racial attacks and the impact of stringent laws set by the colonisers. “Living in an independent country like Zimbabwe means we can now participate across the economy without stigma and discrimination, which our forefathers suffered. “We are free to be Black, confident and to do things the Zimbabwean way. I am also grateful for affirmative action that has been taken by the Government, which has enabled us to venture into businesses no matter how small, to be able to contribute to our development. That’s a big thing for us youths,” said Mr Mazibisa. “However, we surely need a different approach in how things are handled, starting from our ministry. There is a lot to be done to accommodate young people because we are often sidelined and not given the chance to unleash our potential as free citizens. “Secondly, our leaders need to be cosmopolitan about our celebrations, yes, our elders understand what it takes to be free but we also need to be consulted and engaged in these celebrations as we are the future of this free country.” For 22-year-old Miss Trudy Dube from Matobo District, the independence commemorations are a sentimental reminder to the young ones who will never experience stigma and discrimination for being Black. “The fact that Zimbabwe is an independent country is refreshing. We enjoy some rights that our grandparents and parents only dreamt of,” she said. “As youths we cannot wait to celebrate 42 years in our different communities as we remain grateful for the life we lead, thanks to our heroes and heroines who fought, some paying the ultimate price,” said Miss Dube. “My only worry is that after coming this far as a country, we may slowly become slaves if no economic changes are made because as it is we are willing to leave our own Zimbabwe for greener pastures. “Economic challenges are forcing us out of the same country, which our forefathers fought for and that makes me sad as a young person.” Miss Dube said ideally, youths should be leading economic growth but limited opportunities have left them unhappy citizens.
“We should also guard against putting ourselves in a position where any country should feel they can take over Zimbabwe. No, we need to be assured that this freedom was fought for forever, we cannot become a colony again because of economic dependence.” For Miss Geraldine Sibanda, youths will fully enjoy their independence once they have easy access to jobs and opportunities.
“Zimbabwe is indeed turning 42 years of independence this year, as we celebrated back then when we got independence, we still are celebrating even now,” she said. “As a young woman living in a free country, I’m happy to be living in such a time when as Blacks we enjoy our rights. “However, as much as we are free from being colonised, we are facing a tight economy. For instance, I am from a remote area, my location has already distanced me from the opportunity to access information and get employed,” said Sibanda. “I wish to see a country free from economic hiccups so as to have a strong state and youths who are able to see their future within the country. If we still struggle to access bank loans, schools, healthcare because we are from the rural areas, then it means we are not yet that independent as these are the same cries our parents had during their time.” As the country joins hands to celebrate this year’s independence, the youth say they expect leadership to do more to improve their livelihood by widening the opportunity base, which will accommodate every Zimbabwean. — @thamamoe