The Chronicle Midlands Bureau Chief
SIX people were killed in Midlands Province last week and police have expressed concern at the upsurge in murder cases. Midlands provincial police spokesperson Inspector Emmanuel Mahoko said the murders occurred in Gokwe, Chiwundura, Zhombe, Lower Gweru and Zvishavane.  In the first case, he said on April 13, Kesiwe Maketo (51) of Matambeka Village under Chief Sogwala in Lower Gweru retired to bed at around 7pm. “The following morning on April 14 at about 6am, her neighbour went to Maketo’s house and found her lifeless body lying on the floor naked. The matter was reported to the police and the scene was attended. The body had two deep wounds on the forehead. Body was ferried to Gweru General Hospital awaiting post-mortem,” said Insp Mahoko. In the second incident, he said Mavis Wadzogwa (37) of Tagwirei Village, Chief Mazvihwa’s area in Zvishavane, was allegedly killed by her husband, Nobert Mhlanga (36). “The husband was accusing her of misusing funds after she bought a bag using money which was meant for groceries. It is alleged Mhlanga assaulted her using a hoe and bricks all over the body and left her lying unconscious. Villagers tried to rush Wadzogwa to hospital, but she died on the way. Matter was reported to the police. The husband was arrested and is in police custody,” said Insp Mahoko. He said in the third case, police are investigating a case of murder where a 30-year-old man was found lying dead near Maguma Business Centre in Chiwundura on April 13 at 5am. “The night before at about 9pm, Hazvinei Gwapedza was drinking beer at Maguma Business Centre in Chiwundura in the company of a brother. They were approached by one Mannered Gwanzura (25) from Magwayi Village, in Chief Gambiza’s area, who asked them about some past grudges and a misunderstanding arose,” said Insp Mahoko. He said the two brothers fled in different directions. “Hazvinei Gwapedza did not reach home. A search was conducted and his dead body was found lying in the vicinity of the business centre with stab injuries. Police attended the scene and the suspect Mannered Gwanzura was arrested and is assisting with investigations,” said Insp Mahoko. In the fourth and fifth killings, he said two Gokwe villagers were fatally assaulted by a mob after they attacked fellow villagers with knives at a sports field. “We are investigating two cases of murder following the death of two men aged 22 and 23, respectively. The incident occurred on April 18 at about 5pm at Dzire Business Centre in Gokwe, after being attacked by a mob. It is alleged that the now deceased Pardon Muchaitei and Edmore Murindiwa who were drunk, were spectators at a sports field. The two allegedly became violent and started attacking fellow spectators,” said Insp Mahoko. He said Muchaitei allegedly stabbed Stanford Sibanda (24) of Karigwe Village in Chief Nemangwe’s area in Gokwe with an okapi knife once on the back and handed over the knife to Murindiwa. “Murindiwa stabbed five men namely Cephas Ncube (52), Vengesai Mazhinduka (48), Titus Sibanda (70), Jabulani Kufa (18) and Silvester Kufa (22) all from Chief Nemangwe’s area in Gokwe. A mob of other spectators then gathered against the two, and retaliated, overpowering them in the process,” said Insp Mahoko. He said the matter was allegedly reported to the police who found Muchaitei and Murindiwa lying in a pool of blood with multiple injuries while the mob had already dispersed. Insp Mahoko said they were ferried to Gokwe District Hospital for treatment where Murindiwa was pronounced dead upon arrival. “Muchaitei passed on later the same day. The other injured people were ferried to the same hospital where they are currently admitted,” he said. Insp Mahoko said in another matter, Elina Zimba (38) of Mbenge Village under Chief Malisa in Silobela died after being stabbed by her former husband on Independence Day at Mbenge Tuck Shop. “It is alleged that the now deceased was previously married to the suspect, Kundai Khumalo (36) of the same village. The two met at Mbenge Tuck Shop to discuss the custody of their seven-year-old daughter who was staying with the mother,” he said. Insp Mahoko said a misunderstanding arose and Khumalo allegedly dragged Zimba out of the shop and stabbed her three times with a knife. He said Zimba collapsed and people who were at the tuck-shop ran away in fear as the suspect was threatening to stab everyone. “The suspect fled the scene and Zimba died on the spot. The body was conveyed to Kwekwe General Hospital Mortuary awaiting post mortem,” he said.