The Chronicle Kumbirai Christine Alfayi, Midlands Reporter
Two artists from the Midlands province are in India showcasing their talents and theatre works at the ongoing Surajkund Crafts Mela International Festival taking place in New Delhi. The two, who hail from Mvuma are Joel Munyaradzi Zimuto who is showcasing a sculpture of soapstones and Ruvarashe Chibaya who is displaying her craftwork. They are showcasing alongside Bulawayo’s award-winning traditional dance group, Umkhathi Theatre ensemble . The Sarajkund Crafts Mela International Festival is a unique global craft festival that invites artists from across the globe to showcase their culture and talent. It offers unconventional attractions such as traditional folk dance, puppet skits, craftwork and musical shows for tourists of every age  The festival began on March 19 in Haryana’s Faridabad and ends on April 4. More than 20 countries from Europe, South Asia and Africa are participating. Mberengwa District Arts and Culture programme officer, who is the head of the Zimbabwean delegation, Omega Sibanda said the festival has been an eye-opener that creative industries can contribute to the economic growth of the country. “We’re excited to be performing at the Surajkund Crafts Mela International festival in New Delhi, India. This is an annual festival that made its return this year after a two-year hiatus because of Covid-19. We’re representing Zimbabwe and are performing alongside Nigeria, Eswatini, Uganda, Ubzekstan, Cape Verde and others. It’s a big festival which has two performance stages and a lot of craft stalls. Zimbabwe has a craft stall where two artists from the Midlands province are showcasing their talents,” Sibanda said. He said art and culture is a unifier as it allows people of different cultures to interact. “We hope to benefit from this tour by learning new things – craftwork styles and presentation techniques from other groups at the festival.” The visit to India, Sibanda said, is courtesy of the Ministry of Youth, Sports, Arts and Recreation and the National Arts Council of Zimbabwe who facilitated the trip.