The Chronicle Business Editor
GOVERNMENT has urged women to tap into various business opportunities in the tourism sector as it offers great opportunities for empowerment and gender equality.  The World Tourism Organisation (UNWTO) defines gender equality as; the equal rights, responsibilities and opportunities of women and men as well as girls and boys. Equality in this regard does not mean that women and men will become the same but that women’s and men’s rights, responsibilities and opportunities will not depend on whether they are born male or female. Speaking during the occasion of the National Women and Girls sporting event in Bikita, Masvingo last week, communication and advocacy officer in the Ministry of Environment, Climate, Tourism and Hospitality Industry, Ms Norah Takaindisa, said the tourism sector workforce was generally made up of mostly women but stressed the need to enhance the quality of jobs they undertake. “Within the tourism sector women are employed in lower-level jobs as waitresses or hotel cleaning staff. Women are employed in roles that are considered representative of their domestic roles, using the same skills base. In instances where male counterparts take up the same roles they tend to be paid more than the females,” she said. Ms Takaindisa said the National Tourism Policy’s guiding principle is that tourism development should be gender responsive. “The National Tourism Act, which is under review is looking at strengthening the articulation of gender issues in the provisions of the policy,” she said. Ms Takaindisa said the tourism sector, working closely with the Government and regional counterparts was pushing towards narrowing the gender inequalities through initiatives that empower the participation of women into mainstream tourism operations. “These initiatives are in line with the Sadc and AU’s regional strategies aimed at empowerment of women and elimination of all forms of discrimination in order to achieve gender equality,” she said. Ms Takaindisa also said the National Traditional Cookout drive being spearheaded by the First Lady, Amai Auxilia Mnangagwa, which is aimed at equipping women in preparing various traditional cuisine, was a unique product in the tourism sector. She lauded the creation of National Structures of Women in Tourism, which comes on the backdrop of tourism businesses being grabbed by men and women, which highlights a need for a platform to network and learn best practises. “This will also ensure full participation of women in all tourism spheres,” said Ms Takaindisa. She also noted the growing representation of women into tourism industry boards as well as offered skills upgrade support to lowly paid workers including women to ensure that they are able to be promoted. “This was done through a Sustainable Tourism Eliminating Poverty (ST-EP) project initiative carried out in Victoria Falls,” said Ms Takaindisa. Women in the tourism sector are now taking challenging positions and venturing into big projects. A woman-owned upmarket facility in Victoria Falls, Mbano Manor Hotel has created traction drawing visitors from regional and international markets.