The Chronicle Thandeka Moyo-Ndlovu, Senior Health Reporter
ZIMBABWE has been recording a substantial decrease in new Covid-19 cases and deaths since the beginning of this month, a development which experts say should not encourage complacency as the global pandemic is not yet eradicated.  The country has been recording an average of 44 cases for the past week and since the beginning of April, a total of 17 deaths have been recorded and on some days, no deaths are recorded. Statistics from the Ministry of Health and Child Care show that there has been an increase in the number of Zimbabweans who have been inoculated. So far 5 789 301 people have received their first dose, 3 614 353 their second while 565 626 have received their third dose. As of Sunday, Zimbabwe had 247 278 confirmed Covid-19 positive cases, including 241 012 recoveries and 5 463 deaths. In its daily Covid-19 report the ministry said Zimbabwe now has 803 active cases. “Matabeleland South recorded the highest number of 17 new cases recorded on Sunday followed by Harare with four new cases. Bulawayo, Mashonaland East and Manicaland recorded two cases each while other provinces had no cases,” read the report. “Case fatality rate stands at 2,2 percent from as high as 4,2 percent demonstrated by the reduction in daily cases and as compared with the previous waves, Omicron has low deaths despite high numbers of cases. New cases have been declining since April this year and the national recovery rate remains at 97 percent.” Speaking during a recent post-Cabinet briefing, Public Service, Labour and Social Welfare Minister Professor Paul Mavima urged everyone to remain vigilant as the Covid-19 threat remained undiminished ahead of the winter season. “There are no relaxations that have been effected on existing provisions. Everything remains as is. We have people coming to Zimbabwe for the Easter and Independence holidays, hence there is no relaxation whatsoever and we are continuing with that position,” said Prof Mavima. “Fully vaccinated visitors can enter Zimbabwe without the need for a PCR test, but those unvaccinated or with only one dose of vaccine must present a recent negative test. Everyone must conduct their activities and business within the stipulated frameworks pertaining to the number of gatherings, wearing of face masks, sanitising of hands and observation of all regulations. Prof Mavima added: “Despite the dip we have so far registered, we still expect very few gatherings or gatherings being conducted within the stipulated limits and also maximum sanitisation. There is winter coming and we need to remain vigilant.”  — @thamamoe