The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter HIGHLANDERS midfielder Nqobizitha Masuku will go for a scan today to establish the gravity of his ankle injury.  Masuku hopes the ankle injury he picked up in the second-half during Sunday’s goalless stalemate with Triangle United at Gibbo Stadium, will not keep him on the sidelines for long. The defensive midfielder has established himself as a vital cog in the Bosso line-up and is the team’s top scorer with five goals from 10 games. The anchorman was injured when he tried to intercept a pass and was substituted by Muziwakhe Dlamini for the remainder of the second-half. “I’m hoping it’s not bad and should be back soon. You know, when you’re enjoying fine form, you don’t want to be out for long and I just hope all is well when I do the scan,” Masuku said. Bosso coach Mandla Mpofu said the team doctor will advise the technical team on Masuku’s position after today’s scan. “The ankle is still swollen but the good thing is that the injury didn’t affect his knee. We had fears that he might have hurt his knee as well but that’s not the case. Our fears were that injuries picked alone without a challenge tend to keep players out for a long time,” said Mpofu. He said they will not rush the midfield kingpin back to training until he’s fully fit. Masuku is likely to miss Highlanders’ next home league match against Cranborne Bullets. “If the ankle is still swollen tomorrow or Wednesday, chances of him playing this week are slim,” Mpofu said. The Bosso coach was happy that Adrian Silla, who has been playing just ahead of Masuku, shielded the defence well following the injury. He was also impressed by Dlamini’s performance, saying the youngster has shown great potential. In the absence of Masuku, Darlington Munkuli, who was promoted to the first team last week from Bosso 90 to take up Winston Mhango’s place, might find himself thrown into the fray against Cranborne Bullets. “We’ve always had in mind that one day Nqo (Masuku) might not play because of injury or suspension, but I believe we do have cover and whoever comes in should fill the void. We can’t mourn Nqo’s injury, but have to soldier on,” said Mpofu. — @ZililoR