The Chronicle Showbiz Reporter
Winky D fans who missed out or simply did not get enough of the artiste in Bulawayo on Sunday have been given another opportunity to witness him live in action as he will be returning on April 30. Together with Jah Prayzah (JP), the country’s music giants are set to headline the Bulawayo Shutdown gig.
Now in its fifth edition, the Bulawayo Shutdown gig that has been held annually since 2016 as a Zimbabwe International Trade Fair (ZITF) party has interestingly, always been headlined by the two artistes. With the trade fair set to run from April 26 to 30, the gig that is being organised by 2 Kings Entertainment and Harris Hotels has been slated for April 30 at The Boundary. Fab G, DJ Mzoe, DJ Nospa and Noereen are also set to perform on the day. Event promoter, Dee Nosh said preparations for the event have begun with music lovers anticipating to witness the giants on stage, especially Jah Prayzah as he last performed in the city three years ago.  Said Dee Nosh: “The shutdown gig has always been a combo of two giants, Winky D and Jah Prayzah. Before Covid-19, we held the show every year in Bulawayo as a way of providing entertainment for those who would be attending the ZITF as well as fun lovers from the city. It proved to be the biggest show in Zimbabwe hence  we’ve been hosting it consistently.” Quizzed why they have not altered the headline acts, Dee Nosh said it was due to the fact that Bulawayo is the city where the two artistes are comfortable performing together. Since 2016, the event that has been a hit among many and one of the highlights of the trade fair has been held at the Bulawayo Amphitheatre (three years in a row), Large City Hall car park and Hartsfield. The last edition in 2019 was held at Queens Sports Club. On their preferred venue, Dee Nosh said it was Queens as “it was the best because it was central and more accessible to everyone. It also had the biggest turn out so it’s great to be taking the event back there.” People, Dee Nosh said, should expect fireworks as the artistes have two albums each from the last time they performed.