The Chronicle Sikhulekelani Moyo, Business Reporter
FEMALE entrepreneurs should develop strong networks and explore opportunities within their surroundings to grow their businesses, Megafest Women Forum (MWF) president, Mrs Juliet Ziswa, has said. Speaking during the MWF networking event in Bulawayo on Thursday, she dismissed the notion that all opportunities were found in Harare. Mrs Ziswa, a marketing director for OK Zimbabwe, said MWF, for instance, was a brainchild of Bulawayo and has scored major successes in promoting business growth for local women including Matabeleland region and the whole country. “Our mandate is to engage and encourage businesswomen in Bulawayo and the whole Matabeleland region to network and explore the whole region and promote business growth,” she said. “It’s not really about Harare but the whole country. But obviously Bulawayo is the second biggest city, that’s why we started here and we will really want to support women here and inspire them to be bigger. It’s sad that people think everything happens in Harare.”  MWF is part of the Bulawayo Megafest Holdings, an amalgamation of business network­ events that include Megafest Magazine, Megafest Business Awards and Corporate Trainings owned by the Matsika family. Mrs Ziswa said the MWF exists especially to support the girl child and aspiring women to realise their business potential. The forum works hand-in-hand with partners who assist with trainings, finance and infrastructure facilitation. MWF deputy board president, Mrs Karen Gondo, who is the co-founder of Magic Corporate, said the forum has helped her a lot. Board member, Mrs Kathy Mwanza, who is the founder of Cake Fairy in Bulawayo said the forum is all about women coming together to network, giving each other business ideas and connecting each other. “Many ladies here in Bulawayo don’t have exposure, which is what we want to bring so that we expose them and show them what other women are doing in countries like Kenya where women have properties through forums like these,” she said. -@sikhulekelaniM1 