The Chronicle Black Coffee won his first-ever Grammy award, earned in the best dance/electronic album category, with his 2021 LP, Subconsciously.  The win marked the first time a South African producer won or was nominated in this category. Taking to the stage in a sharp white suit accompanied by his son Esona during the première ceremony this past weekend, the artiste said: “I want to thank God for the gift of music and being able to share it with the world and heal some souls.” He also pointed out that the young man on stage with him was his first-born son, Esona, and that he has five children back home in Johannesburg to take to future ceremonies. In his speech, the artiste born Nkosinathi Innocent Maphumulo thanked his album collaborators including Pharrell and David Guetta, who Black Coffee says “believed in working with a smaller artiste like myself and trusting me and trusting my ear.” Other artistes who appear on Subconsciously include Sabrina Claudio, Usher and Diplo. “While I was working on this album, it was so important for me to make it accessible to as many people as possible,” Black Coffee recently told Billboard of his nomination. “The album challenges many sounds and styles, all while staying true to my roots. I wanted to make an album that could be listened to, not only in the car or in the club, but while you’re cleaning your house, going through a hard time and everything in between. It breaks boundaries, and I think that’s where the appeal ultimately lies.” Black Coffee was one of the night’s two winners in the best dance/electronic categories, with RÜFÜS DU SOL taking home the award for best dance/electronic recording for their track “Alive”. In a post on Twitter, President Cyril Ramaphosa congratulated Black Coffee. “Congratulations to Black Coffee for being awarded the Best Dance/Electronic Music award for his album Subconsciously at last night’s Grammys. Thank you for flying the flag and inspiring a new generation of talent to take over the world.” – Billboard/Showbiz Reporter