The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
HIGHLANDERS could risk “injured” midfielder Nqobizitha Masuku for their clash against Cranborne Bullets at Barbourfields Stadium on Sunday, with coach Mandla Mpofu indicating that he could be thrown into the fray despite only returning to training yesterday.  Masuku picked up an ankle injury in last Sunday’s goalless draw against Triangle United at Gibbo Stadium when he tried to intercept a pass. The medical team advised that he had no fracture. The midfielder has been Bosso’s pivot this season, scoring in the side’s last two home wins. He also scored in the 1-1 draw against Caps United in Harare. Early in the week, Mpofu had completely ruled out Masuku for the tie, but at yesterday’s press briefing he raised a glimmer of hope. “The concern is on Nqobizitha Masuku. He limped off the pitch on Sunday. We hope he will pass a late fitness test. The doctors had given him a rest, but he has been cleared to start training today (yesterday). I am hopeful he will be available on Sunday. That is the only concern, but he has big character and I am sure he will soldier on. I am 90 percent sure he will be available on Sunday,” said Mpofu. He also said defender Andrew Mbeba and winger Ray Lunga are back from injury and available for selection. Commenting on their upcoming game against the army side, Mpofu maintained that they want to make Barbourfields Stadium a fortress and any team that visits must feel the heat. “Looking at their recent form, they have won two games in a row. They are a team that will come here and fight. Maybe they are fighting to survive relegation this season, but we can’t undermine them. “I will take all the positives from our draw at Triangle. I felt we could have collected all three points considering the way we played, but again all the focus now is on Sunday and we have prepared well. Looking at the squad, there is good and healthy competition. In the absence of Mbeba, Crispen Ncube came in and played well. With Masuku limping off, Adrian Silla also had a good shift in midfield. We are happy with the competition in the squad,” he said.
Highlanders are on a five-match unbeaten run and Mpofu believes they are making steady progress. “I am happy with the progress we are making considering we have conceded one goal in five games and scored eight. It’s a great improvement. We could have done better in the three draws we got,” said Mpofu. – @innocentskizoe