The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
THE Bulawayo Basketball Association (BBA) has lined up a host of festivities to conclude its league programme in style at Khanyisile Sports Centre tomorrow. BBA secretary general Francis Dube said they will be crowning the provincial champions, who will play in the national championships play-offs in Gweru in a fortnight’s time. “We are set to conclude our league programme on Saturday. The champions in both divisions will go for the national championships play-offs in Gweru on April 9, where they will meet teams from Midlands and Masvingo. Only two teams will qualify for the national championships, which will be held in Bulawayo from April 29 to May 2. “We want to create a carnival atmosphere for the last games. We are going to be crowning the champions and we want to make the occasion special. The idea is to make sure that those that will come to watch the games will also get quality entertainment on and off the pitch. We will have dunking contests and shooting contests to keep the crowds entertained,” said Dube. In the men’s division, Mavericks have already won the league with a game to spare as they sit on an unassailable 26 points from 13 games. Second-placed Lakers have concluded all their 14 games and collected 24 points. Mavericks will wrap up their campaign with a potentially explosive game against Giants.  In the ladies’ division, Lakers, who still have a chance to snatch the title from leaders Mavericks, will play Lakers Glenlodge this evening in a game they should win to keep their title hopes alive. In the event that they win, they will face Mavericks in the title decider. Lakers A, who have played a game less than Mavericks, have accumulated 23 points, while the leaders are on 26 points. Fixtures Today: City Royals vs NUST (W), Lakers Glen Lodge vs Lakers A ( W), Legends vs City Knights (A) Tomorrow: Lakers Supermed vs Baseline ( B), Mavericks B vs NUST B ( B), Lakers Mzansi vs Highlanders (W), Angels vs City Royals (W), Clippers vs NUST (A), Mavericks vs Lakers (W)
Mavericks vs Giants ( A)
– @innocentskizoe