The Chronicle 1. The Law of Belief.
Whatever you truly believe with feeling and passion becomes your reality. Act in a manner consistent with your belief especially belief about yourself. What you experience or see in your life is what you have believed for yourself. If you do not have faith in greatness for your destiny you will never see it, so accept as true, great things for your life and then you will surely witness immensity; free yourself from doubt and fear. Luke 1:30-31: Then the angel said to her, “Do not be afraid, Mary, for you have found favor with God. And behold, you will conceive in your womb and bring forth a Son, and shall call His name JESUS. (NKJV). A servant of God stating that you are a multimillionaire, that you are going to conceive a multimillionaire status, when you do not even have a dollar in your pocket is the same scenario of the angel telling Mary that she will conceive in her womb yet she had never ‘met with a man.’  Mary knew that in the natural world you had to meet a man to become pregnant. That is why most people have questions when told that they are wealthy. How will this happen when I am struggling in business? How will I become affluent when my products are not being sold? If the Lord has said yes, then indeed you shall become a multimillionaire! Conception will take place and you will, by your faith, attain that status. A multimillionaire rank is of God and can be released spiritu¬ally by His power, therefore, even though you may be penniless, always quote “with God nothing shall be impossible.” Believe prophetic words uttered over your life, such that when they are spoken, you say, “let it be unto me Lord according to your word.” Let your spoken words be in accordance with your conviction for your life. It is easy to prosper when you receive with faith and believe in what the Word of God says. You do not become a multimillionaire the day you start count¬ing your first million, but the day you believe that you are one. You turn out to be what you decide to believe; this is a law for anything that you set your hand to, either a ministry or business. If you can conceive it, you can achieve it. God Bless… – eaglelifeassembly@yahoo.com.