The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
THE draw away against Caps United followed by an emphatic victory over Yadah FC last Sunday have calmed the storm that had rocked the Highlanders’ boat, but head coach Mandla Mpofu admits he remains under pressure. His side had a goal scoring problem, which appears to have been solved, but he is yet to go past the side’s biggest hurdle. Gibbo Stadium was the last place Bosso collected maximum points on the road back in 2018. Mpofu will lead his charges to the same venue seeking to break their 24 game away jinx. Their last trip to Gibbo in 2019 saw Bosso at the receiving end of a 2-1 defeat. Looking back at that encounter, Bosso will find some motivation in that man of the moment Nqobizitha Masuku was on target that day. Masuku has been on fire for Bosso in this campaign, scoring five goals in nine matches and he will be hoping to carry his goal scoring touch into Sunday’s game. The mood in the Highlanders’ camp has improved and Mpofu looked at ease addressing members of the media. “The pressure I had when the team was not playing well is nothing compared to the pressure I have now that the team is winning. We cannot relax and get carried away. Winning games means more pressure for us. The pressure we have with winning games means we have to work extra hard,” said Mpofu. Masuku concurred with his coach that the team cannot get carried away. “We don’t have to get carried away by winning these two or three games. We have to be consistent. In away games we have to make a statement because we are a very big team.  The most important thing is for us to be consistent. We have to win these away games. We are not perfect at the moment and we have to work extra hard because when Highlanders is winning every team that we play wants to upset us. At the end of the day we have to keep pushing,” said Masuku. On his fine form in front of goal, Masuku said: “It’s doing the same thing, which is working extra hard on finishing at training. Over the last couple of years I have been scoring goals, but maybe people did not notice. Every season I score at least three goals. I think I have regained that scoring touch which is good for the team.” Club captain Ariel Sibanda also weighed in and promised maximum points. “We are not happy with the way we have been playing, but we appreciate the efforts of the team. It’s not an easy game, but as a big team we should stamp our authority. We are going there to win. We are not looking for any other result. We are trying to get the team back to where it belongs,” said Sibanda. – @innocentskizoe