The Chronicle Angela Sibanda, Chronicle Reporter
THE Australian Embassy in Zimbabwe has sponsored the renovation of the National Art Gallery in Bulawayo and the establishment of an innovation hub in Emganwini suburb.  Over the past years, the embassy has partnered with the National Art Gallery of Zimbabwe in upgrading ageing infrastructure and replacing old equipment. Australian Ambassador to Zimbabwe Bronte Moules, who conducted a tour of the renovated gallery in Bulawayo on Wednesday, said her country enjoys cordial diplomatic relations with Zimbabwe. She said the renovation started in 2020. “Although we are based in Harare, we are interested in the whole country and the friendship between Zimbabwe and Australia is solid so we were delighted to sponsor the repairs of this amazing art gallery as it is such an important part of this city and its culture,” said Ms Moules. “Some of the repairs include the repair of the balcony, gutters, renovations and painting of the gallery including the ramp for those on wheelchairs to also access the art facility.” Ambassador Moules commended the good work done by the gallery team and for handling the fund in a transparent manner. “The gallery has done a fantastic job with the renovations and makes the gallery an amazing place for visitors to come and enjoy local art,” she said. “Considering that dealing with old buildings is very difficult, the gallery has done well with the resources.” National Gallery Bulawayo acting director Ms Silenkosi Moyo said the sponsored renovations have opened doors for improved service delivery. “The 2020 renovations have given a new lease of life. The building was looking old and dilapidated, thus affecting our operations as our visitors were shying away from the space,” she said. “This had effects on our programming. The space was inaccessible to persons with disabilities but with the grant we were able to make the space accessible allowing us to be inclusive. “A performance stage was put up to allow performing artists to have a centrally located space to host their shows. This has allowed us to have collaborative projects with artists in the performing sector.” Six months ago, the embassy, through a partnership with Uncommon.org and Nedbank Zimbabwe opened an Innovation hub in Emganwini township, a technological training centre for young people around the city. “We sponsor a small project of coding training for young people, which is based on a converted shipping container with solar panels that is used as a training lab for young people especially those from vulnerable communities,” said Ambassador Moules. “They are trained and equipped with coding and IT skills and the Bulawayo project is an expansion of the Harare project that we started in several areas in the capital. Young children respond very easily and fast. Some of the students from the training hub have found jobs, locally and internationally. “The programme is going so well and gives the youth other options outside the ordinary professional jobs that require several steps in education.” Coding is basic computer programming language that is used to create apps, websites and software. The embassy also supports other community-based programmes around the country. “We are also supporting a few projects on women and girl’s empowerment, which are meant to give more economic opportunities to women and girls as well as vocational training and education around sexual reproductive health,” said Ambassador Moules. “We have a range of projects but mainly small-scale projects targeting small community groups in the agriculture sector.”