The Chronicle Sukulwenkosi Dube-Matutu, Chronicle Reporter AT the age of 19 in 1969 Mr Misheck Ndlovu dropped out of school due to financial challenges and left his rural home in Matobo District for South Africa with only a Standard 6 (Grade Seven) certificate. He secured his first job as an errand boy at a hotel in the neighbouring country. Since he did not have any qualification he had to get by with any job offer that came his way. Mr Ndlovu slowly grew a liking for the hospitality industry. Little did he know that 26 years later he would start his own empire in the form of Mishies Gwanda Hotel in Matabeleland South. His inspirational rags-to-riches tale depicts the spirit of the true die-hard Zimbabwean that earned the country its Independence from the settler regime. Mr Ndlovu literally educated himself through correspondence and was unwavering in his dream which he kept in sight despite considerable hardship. He turned 72 years recently and handed over the day-to-day runnings of his hotel to his children to focus on his religious ministry under the Harvest House International Church where he serves as a pastor. He said each time he looks at his achievements he can not help but smile as he knows that he has created a lifetime legacy for his children, grandchildren and generations to come. It felt like a dream for Mr Ndlovu when he signed the paperwork to assume ownership of the hotel on April 1 in 1995 which at the time was known as Hardy’s Inn. The journey to where he is was not easy and he said he had to work extra hard to realise his goals. Mr Ndlovu said through the course of his journey he found favour in the eyes of his employers because of hard work and commitment. He grew up in rural Matobo. His father who was a communal farmer lost his cattle to drought leaving the family without a source of livelihood. The situation at home left Mr Ndlovu with no option but to leave the country in search of greener pastures. While working as an errand boy in South Africa he furthered his education through correspondence until his wrote his O Level. He later enrolled at a hotel school in South Africa which marked the beginning of his professional career in the hospitality industry. “I got my first job in the hospitality industry when I was 19 at a newly opened hotel. I didn’t have the luxury of galivanting and squandering money as I knew that I had a duty to support my mother and siblings back at home. I corresponded with the International Correspondence College for four years until I wrote my O Levels at 24 years old in 1974. I would work during the day and study at night. For examinations I had to come back home in Zimbabwe and write them,” he said. “I learnt at lot about the hospitality industry during my first job and I developed a lot of interest in the industry. The manager I was working under told me that he saw a lot of potential in me and he said I could do well as a manager. I later enrolled at a hotel school for black people which was in Pretoria and that marked the start of my professional career.”  Mr Ndlovu said he decided to return home and he joined Holiday Inn Bulawayo in 1977 soon after it had opened. He served the institution for 11 years  and rose through the ranks, gaining vast knowledge of the hospitality industry. Mr Ndlovu said he became the first black person to hold a managerial position at Holiday Inn. He first held the position of an on-job-trainer at the hotel and was later promoted to food and beverage manager. Before he left the hotel he was the deputy general manager. He benefited from a Government scholarship and went to study for a Diploma in Hotel and Catering in the UK. Mr Ndlovu said he later became a general manager for Mr Japhet Mpofu who owned a group of hotels which comprised Greys Inn, Royal Hotel and the then Hardy’s Inn. He said when Mr Mpofu decided to sell his hotels he offered to buy Hardy’s Inn which is now Mishies Gwanda Hotel. “I would like to thank Mr Japhet Mpofu for believing in me. I didn’t have money to buy the hotel but he was patient with me and gave me time to apply for a loan. I used my house which I had in Riverside in Bulawayo as collateral. The bank expected me to deposit a certain amount for me to get the loan, but I didn’t have the money. Mr Mpofu lent me the money which I deposited. Mr Mpofu believed in me and he trusted that I could run the hotel well,” he said. “I had to work for what I have attained today. After taking over the hotel I had to work very hard to upgrade it and keep it running. There was a time when I had to work in the kitchen, work as a hotelier and also rush to Bulawayo for orders. When I started the hotel I didn’t have any money and I also had to ensure that I made enough money to pay something towards my loan each month. My late wife helped me a lot in starting the business.” He said he has always believed that being a hard worker pays off. Mr Ndlovu is now a director at Mishies Gwanda Hotel. His eldest daughter Mrs Sibongiseni Phiri is the chief executive officer while his four other children are board members. Mr Ndlovu decided to name his hotel Mishies which is an acronym for his name, his late’s wife’s names and those of his five children. @DubeMatutu