The Chronicle Leonard Ncube in Victoria Falls
THE Zimbabwe Parks and Wildlife Management Authority (Zimparks) has commissioned an innovation hub at its main camp in Hwange National Park in Matabeleland North province.  First Lady, Amai Auxilia Mnangagwa, through her organisation, Angel of Hope Foundation, partnered a United States-based Matter Foundation and Victoria Falls’ Love for Africa to come up with the project. Located at Main Camp Primary School, the facility is set to provide information communication technology-based services at the learning institution and Zimparks camp. It becomes the first such facility at Zimparks administered properties in the country. It is equipped with state-of-the-art flat TV screens and iPads for use by pupils and teachers. Local telecommunications operator, TelOne, will provide WiFi services. ICT, Postal and Courier Services Minister Jenfan Muswere officiated at the commissioning recently on behalf of the First Lady. He said the Government was elated by partnerships with the private sector towards development of digital services in the country. Also in attendance were Environment, Climate, Tourism and Hospitality Industry Minister Nqobizitha Mangaliso Ndlovu who said ICTs were critical in education, which also covers the environment. Matabeleland North Minister of State for Provincial Affairs and Devolution, Richard Moyo, also witnessed the event and said such initiatives auger well with the province’s development agenda. “We want to thank the First Lady and her foundation for this development through partners who built and provided this state-of-the-art facility and equipment. This will serve Main Camp and Dete areas. “This is a welcome development, which will close the digital gap between urban and rural learners,” said Minister Moyo. A similar innovation hub will also be established at Nechilibi High School, close to 20km away from Main Camp at Cross Mabale. The Main Camp’s innovation hub is solar-powered and is fitted with a battery whose lifespan is 10 years hence learning activities will not be affected by electricity outages. The hub provides a sustainable learning environment to gradually shift the model of teaching and learning to a student-centred approach thereby creating enriching, engaging and personalised learning opportunities for any student regardless of conditions. -@ncubeleon