The Chronicle Lumbidzani Dima, Chronicle Reporter
DEFENCE and War Veterans Affairs Minister Oppah Muchinguri-Kashiri is expected to headline the clean-up exercise in Bulawayo’s Southwold suburb today. Zimbabweans will today embark on a nationwide clean-up campaign, with Bulawayo and Matabeleland provinces geared for the event. President Mnangagwa declared the first Friday of each month as the National Environment Cleaning Day in December 2018, requiring all citizens to clean their surroundings between 8AM and 10AM. EMA Bulawayo provincial environmental manager Mrs Sithembisiwe Ndlovu said besides Southwold, clean-ups will be held in other areas as well. “While the main site is Southwold Shopping Centre, other usual centres will also be conducting clean-up campaigns in their respective areas,” she said. In Matabeleland South, the Provincial Affairs and Devolution Minister Abednico Ncube will grace the main clean-up exercise at Mawabeni Business Centre in Umzingwane district. Matabeleland South Environmental Management Agency provincial manager, Mr Decent Ndlovu said they are looking forward to cleaning most of the service centres across the province. After the clean-up they are set to take part in greening the environment by tree planting. “We encourage every local authority and all members of the community to participate in this important event that will help in sustaining the environment.  “The main clean-up exercise will be at Mawabeni Business Centre and people will begin preparing for the exercise at around 7.30AM so that we start at exactly 8AM,” he said. In Matabeleland North Province, Mrs Chipo Mpofu-Zuze, the provincial environmental manager, said all was set for the clean-up campaign today, which will kickstart the competition of the cleanest centre in the province. The provincial event will be held at Siachilaba in Binga, and every other district will be having a cleanup in its respective  areas. Matabeleland North Provincial Affairs and Devolution Minister, Richard Moyo is the guest of honour at the provincial event. “For Matabeleland North the clean-up this time around is a bit unique because last year in November Binga RDC and EMA mobilised five business centres along Dete to Binga,  and we are running a competition. The competition is termed ‘the cleanest business centre’, so, it’s going to be launched tomorrow,” said Mrs Zuze.