The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter THREE points out of 21 and a seven-match winless streak is a pathetic run that Bulawayo Chiefs FC will want to stop when they travel to Mutare to face Manica Diamonds at Sakubva Stadium tomorrow. Chiefs have managed to cling onto 12th place on the league table with 10 points from 10 games despite their bad spell. Manica Diamonds will be out to stretch their unbeaten run to seven games and Chiefs should be ready for a demanding afternoon. The Gem Boys are fourth on the table with 19 points, four behind leaders Chicken Inn, who are away to Whawha this afternoon in Gweru. Manica Diamonds put up a good fight last weekend when they forced a 3-3 draw against Chicken Inn and with a bit of luck, they could have stolen maximum points in Bulawayo. It is the diamond miners’ home record that should send shivers to Chiefs. They’ve only dropped points once in the five games played at Sakubva in the 2021/22 Castle Lager Premier Soccer League season, drawing 0-0 against FC Platinum. Teams that have been slayed by Manica Diamonds in Mutare are Whawha (4-0), Highlanders (1-0), Caps United (6-2) and Triangle United (2-1). But that record isn’t worrying Chiefs coach Nilton Terroso, who watched his side give away a late goal to draw 1-1 against Ngezi Platinum Stars last weekend. “There are things that we need to improve after going through our analysis and how we performed in the game. It’s a fact that we’ve conceded goals in the last three games and in the previous two matches we’ve led only to give points away. “We led 1-0 against Black Rhinos and lost 2-1.  Last weekend we led 1-0 and in the 84th minute we conceded. We need to improve in terms of our mentality, improve without the ball,” said Terroso. Chiefs’ defence will have to keep a close eye on leading league scorer Nyasha Chintuli with nine goals and his striking partner Farai Mugumwa on three goals. If they manage to keep the striking duo under lock and key, close the Manica Diamonds’ supply chain and disrupt their build-ups, Chiefs might spring a shocker.  A positive thing for Chiefs is that despite their poor run, they have been able to remain united. “We can’t pretend things are good when we don’t win and not getting results we want. Of course, the mood is better when you win. But in all honesty, it’s not something that has caused division. The team hasn’t lost hope and remains united. That’s the positive thing to take away from the last seven games which we didn’t do enough. I believe the next seven games will be better and we will turn the corner,” Terroso said. On paper, Chiefs have experienced players who can deliver. Strikers Obriel Chirinda and Perfect Chikwende are capable of taking any defenders in the league, while Lucky Ndlela and Kelvin Madzonngwe pull strings in the midfield alongside the exciting Mthokozisi Msebe. Meanwhile, at Barbourfields Stadium this afternoon, Bulawayo City host champions FC Platinum, with Highlanders being at the same venue tomorrow for a date against Cranborne Bullets. A potentially explosive fixture is on the cards at Baobab Stadium this afternoon where championship chasing Dynamos take on Ngezi. Former Warriors’ captain Benjani Mwaruwari will be in charge of his first home game as Ngezi’s coach against a DeMbare side that is enjoying a good run, sitting second on the table and breathing down the neck of Chicken Inn. Fixtures Today: Herentals v Triangle United (National Sports Stadium), Black Rhinos v ZPC Kariba (Sakubva), Ngezi Platinum Stars v Dynamos (Baobab), Bulawayo City v FC Platinum (Barbourfields), Whawha v Chicken Inn (Ascot)
Tomorrow: Highlanders v Cranbourne Bullets (Barbourfields), Manica Diamonds v Bulawayo Chiefs (Sakubva), Caps United v Yadah (National Sports Stadium) – @ZililoR