The Chronicle WITH the Easter and Independence holidays only a week away, VAYA Technologies has urged Zimbabweans to keep their homes secure with the company’s innovative security systems.  The call comes as the Zimbabwe Republic Police has warned the public to be vigilant following the recent spike in burglary and robbery cases around the country, and has advised the public to strengthen security in their homes. VAYA Technologies chief executive officer, Mr Givemore Jojo, said as people prepare to take a break and travel during the holidays, it was critical to ensure that their houses and business premises are protected against burglaries and theft. “As a home owner, you can’t always be around to keep an eye on your home and property. Yet with break-ins unfortunately becoming increasing, you may want to ensure the safety of your family and the protection of your goods and property by beefing up security at your home,” Mr Jojo said. “Our VAYA Smart Security systems use advanced technology to help secure your home against more than just the threat of burglary. From carbon monoxide to fire, our smart home security system is the best defence against potential threats to your home and family’s safety,” he said. VAYA’s smart security system consists of, among other things, a control panel with peripheral devices that include keypads, sirens, door and window contacts, motion detectors, glass- break sensors, environmental sensors, smoke detectors, carbon monoxide detectors, high water sensors and temperature sensors. “In addition to CCTV surveillance, the security system is equipped with short and long-range sensors for open spaces, entry ways and rooftops as well as a perimeter camera and alarm system,” said Mr Jojo. He added that the most convenient aspect of the VAYA Smart Security system is the fact that customers can also use their mobile phones to monitor security cameras and control smart devices in their houses. “Remote access can also help you to save electricity. For example, if you left home and noticed you forgot to turn off the lights, you can do that remotely. Or you can control things like your thermostat to disable it from heating the house if you’re not going to be around for a few days,” he said. A recent study performed by the Rutgers University School showed that the crime rate decreases as the number of registered home burglar alarm systems increase. So this means having a home security system will not only protect your property but will also contribute to a safer neighbourhood. Mr Jojo said by installing a home security system, people add an extra layer of protection to their property, which helps in lowering their insurance premiums. “Since security cameras deter crime, it means you’re less likely to experience a burglary, which leads to a lesser chance of filing an insurance claim. As a result, having a home security system could reduce your homeowner’s insurance by up to 20%,” he said. Customers can get the VAYA Smart Security system installed at their premises by simply calling +263777222701.