The Chronicle Chronicle Reporter
VUMBACHIKWE Mine in Gwanda has allayed word of a mass exodus of mineworkers insinuated by whistle-blowers and picked on by the media calling the allegations “unfortunate but expected wherever change is being implemented in any establishment”.  Allegations had abounded that estimated that close to 140 mineworkers had either been laid off or resigned in the past two months. However, documents provided to Chronicle from the official payroll detailing names, grades and designations of those that have left since the start of the year due to dismissal or resignations are a far cry from the alleged 140. Instead, only 14 have either resigned or were let go, with a total number reaching 25 including those that had reached their age of retirement or had their contracts run out unrenewed. “As you may have seen from the circular that triggered the response, we are in a diligent process of running an in-depth investigation into possible misconduct and unexplained gold losses at the mine’s processing plant and wherever the buck stops we have focused our investigations — a process that started on February 7 this year,” said a spokesperson for the mine. “Expectedly, where people’s livelihoods are at risk any investigation is bound to instil panic and fear and while we do not fault the sources, we assure them that the process is independent and no one with nothing to fear has anything to worry about. In fact, the fingered services manager Marida Van Der Spuy is nowhere near these investigations and proceedings.” “We are investigating possible losses and the change that the process will usher in will mean better days for the plant as a business and the workers as part of the Vumbachikwe mine family.” The Gwanda-based gold mine had been plagued by operational problems that saw a delay in the payment of staff and low output which prompted authorities to look deeper into operations and output resulting in the investigative process. “The President, in line with national projections to boost gold production and create a middle-income economy for all Zimbabweans by the year 2030 has been clear on what needs to be done. We need to be diligent as producers for the benefit of the nation. Supporting efforts to plug gold loss are therefore in line with the President’s vision, which he yet again repeated at the historic Independence celebrations held for the first time in our side of the country in Bulawayo. We believe there is no better time for Vumbachikwe to step up to the plate and push the national vision than now,” said the spokesperson. The company has currently picked up amid the ongoing restructuring and has restored its status as an employer of choice in the mining sector in Gwanda, with salaries and NEC negotiated pay rises now up to date. “We are not out of the woods until we fully cleanse any possible operational problems as well as finish investigations into staff conduct but certainly our general staff and partners ought to know we are optimistic that the best lies ahead as a mine as well as a player in the national economy as espoused in the President’s Independence message,” said the spokesperson. Meanwhile, a whistle-blower policy is being carved to ensure two-way communication and that those with information to protect the mine can share it safely while also being able to communicate their fears and problems without fear of reprisals.