The Chronicle Thandeka Moyo-Ndlovu, Senior Reporter 
THE Government is working on ensuring that civil servants who are members of the Premier Services Medical Aid Society (PSMAS) access quality health care services without paying shortfalls.  This comes after an outcry from members who have failed to access healthcare in the past months due to shortfalls and the introduction of co-payment which PSMAS was demanding before patients could be seen. PSMAS serves at least 90 percent of Zimbabwe’s civil servants. In an interview, Public Service Commission Secretary, Ambassador Jonathan Wutawunashe said the Government will maintain its 80 percent contribution to civil servant’s premiums but would work to ensure members get services without any hurdles. “We are speaking to PSMAS to ensure that when a civil servant goes to a health facility with a PSMAS card in hand, he/she will be assisted without any challenges. Government is in talks with PSMAS and PSMI with the aim of helping them to avail services to civil servants without demanding a top up,” said Ambassador Wutawunashe. He said Government will not allow PSMAS to collapse as it has been at the forefront of rendering premium services to Government workers. “We want Government employees to know that when they go to seek services, their premiums would have been fully paid up and there won’t be any shortfalls to talk about,” said Ambassador Wutaunashe. He said financial support is also going to be given to PSMAS to ensure its pharmacies have adequate drugs. Ambassador Wutawunashe said: “PSMAS and the Premier Services Medical Investment (PSMI) are entities that have in the past provided healthcare services for civil servants and the Government has moved in to ensure they are capacitated to pay service providers by funding the existing gaps.” He said the situation is set to change for PSMAS cardholders as Government wants civil servants to access health services without any hindrances. PSMI, which is in charge of the clinics, pharmacies and hospitals, recently adopted a co-payment system where every member of PSMAS is required to pay US$5 or ZWL$1 050 before receiving treatment or services. The company justified the move saying subscriptions on the medical aid side track the official rate while costs are being incurred based on parallel market rates. PSMI said co-payments were introduced to assist in meeting operating expenses. – @thamamoe