The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
ODDS are heavily staked against relegation-threatened Bulawayo City FC when they play host to Castle Lager Premier Soccer League reigning champions FC Platinum at Barbourfields Stadium tomorrow.  It’s a game that City go into as underdogs, with their unheralded young squad hoping to break their winless jinx against the platinum miners. The two sides have met six times since City made its PSL debut in 2016, with FC Platinum winning five clashes. The best result that City posted was a 1-1 draw at home in 2017. Both sides face off tomorrow hard-pressed for maximum points, with the champions in sixth place with 16 points from 10 games. They are hard pressed to close the seven-point gap that championship pacesetters Chicken Inn enjoy. On the other hand, City understand the need to maximise on home advantage and collect points to move away from the relegation zone. City are second from the bottom of the league table with six points. City’s central midfielder Melikhaya Ncube said they are confident of winning and are not bothered that FC Platinum are three-time league champions. He said they are motivated to be playing against the league’s “big boys”. “Yes, we are playing the champions, but we’ve got our own objective, which is to win. It’s not that we’ve been playing badly as a team; we’ve just been unlucky most of the times and if we can stick to what the coaches tell us, I think we can get a positive result,” said Ncube. He has been one of the outstanding players for City alongside former national Under-20 utility player Leslie Lunga, towering 19-year-old central defender Mpumelelo Bhebhe and ex-Bosso central defender Vincent Moyo, whose career has been revived since crossing the floor to the municipal side. Former Orlando Pirates development striker Rodi Sibanda (21), who is on loan at City from Highlanders, and gangly forward Nqobile Ndlovu are likely to be assigned to lead the attack. “If we follow instructions, concentrate throughout the game, take our chances and avoid making mistakes, I think we can collect maximum points. Playing against big clubs on its own self-motivates and despite positive results failing to come our way, the guys are looking forward to the game,” said Bhebhe. FC Platinum also have youngsters that have been doing well in the form of striker Thandolwenkosi Ngwenya (19), Hagaziyo Magaya (21), Kelvin Mangiza (20), Panashe Mtimbanyoka (19) and Oscar Bhebhe (19). Experienced players Gift Bello, Rainsome Pavari, Brian Banda, Gift Mbweti and Donald Teguru have been tasked with providing guidance to the youngsters. Fixtures Today: Harare City vs Tenax CS FC (National Sports Stadium) Tomorrow: Herentals vs Triangle United (National Sports Stadium), Black Rhinos vs ZPC Kariba (Sakubva), Ngezi Platinum Stars vs Dynamos (Baobab), Bulawayo City vs FC Platinum (Barbourfields), Whawha vs Chicken Inn (Ascot) Sunday: Highlanders vs Cranbourne Bullets (Barbourfields), Manica Diamonds vs Bulawayo Chiefs (Sakubva), Caps United vs Yadah (National Sports Stadium)
— @ZililoR