The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Chronicle Reporter
BULAWAYO City councillors want businesses and vendors to be fined for littering the areas they operate from.
Bulawayo City Council at the beginning of the year embarked on a cleaning exercise targeting sanitary lanes.  What is however disturbing is that as soon as the waste is cleared, the litterbugs are back at it and in no time the sanitary lanes are filled with garbage. In the latest council report, councillors said they are concerned with litter around the city centre and are mooting a policy to fine vendors and businesspeople for littering their environs. In a report of the Health Housing and Education Committee, Councillor Mzama Dube commended efforts by council to collect refuse around the city but the efforts were being frustrated by businesses and vendors who were littering the places they operate from. Councillor Rodney Jele proposed that vendors and shop owners be fined for littering. He said it was unfortunate that council does not have enough manpower to monitor littering at vending places and in sanitary lanes. Clr Jele said council should come up with by-laws that make it an offence to throw litter at undesignated places including sanitary lanes and fine the culprits. Councillor Pilate Moyo raised concern about secluded areas which did not have access to refuse collection services. He said people ended up dumping garbage at undesignated places because there was no refuse collection service. Councillor Silas Chigora raised concern about illegal vendors who were crowding pavements and roads. He said council must take stern action against them and impose fines as such activities were illegal. The committee’s deputy chairperson Alderman Monica Lubimbi said she fully supported the proposal to fine those littering and the illegal vendors. Bulawayo Vendors and Traders Association director Mr Michael Ndiweni said it was unfair to just blame vendors and businesses for littering. “I have seen smartly dressed men and women throwing waste or litter everywhere. The problem of sanitary lanes has nothing to do with vendors. For me it is about proper disposal of refuse not about vendors. Council must come up with a policy that compels everyone to dispose litter at designated places,” said Mr Ndiweni. He said keeping the city clean was everyone’s responsibility. He said council on its part must regularly collect refuse from designated places to avoid a situation whereby there are heaps of uncollected garbage. Last month, council mooted the idea of bringing in the army to help clear the streets of illegal vendors, something that was condemned by the vendors.