The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo in Kezi A DOMINICAN Convent High School pupil, Gianna Mafu (15), brought smiles to rural girls with a surprise donation of sanitary pads to Zamanyoni Secondary School in Kezi, Matabeleland South province. Gianna sourced the pads through her Gianna’s Pad Drive Initiative. Addressing the learners at the handover ceremony, she said she felt compelled to fill a gap that was affecting the rural girl child as research has shown that some of them actually go for a week without going to school every month when they are on their periods. “The reason why I was compelled to make this donation of pads was to help fill a gap as I know there are many girls in rural areas who face challenges during their menstrual cycle as they are unable to get sanitary wear as research has shown that most girls from rural areas miss a week of school every month due to menstrual issues,” Gianna said. She thanked those who heeded her call for donations including her mum and dad, Jane and Methuseli. “I hope my little gesture has and will somehow empower the rural girl child,” she added.  Speaking after receiving the donation on behalf of her peers, Andiswa Mhlanga, who is also a junior councillor said they will remain forever grateful to Gianna for the donation as some of them faced serious challenges on a monthly basis as they could not afford the cost of medically tested sanitary pads. She said it was now the norm that every month, some of her peers do not come to school for a whole week. “Some people may not understand or know the pain we go through as rural girls, we sometimes bother our lady teachers for pads but they too can not give all of us. At one time we were given home-made pads which were very uncomfortable so what Gianna did makes us so happy and emotional at the same time, considering that she is our age mate. Considering her school, you would not even suspect that she can think of a poor rural girl,” she said. Zamanyoni School head Njabulo Ncube said it was amazing and surprising that a young girl like Gianna could think of helping other girls out of her own volition. “This is just great, I can’t say much but just to thank Gianna and her parents too for supporting her in all this,” said Mr Ncube.