The Chronicle Sukulwenkosi Dube-Matutu, Chronicle Reporter
SEVEN-YEAR-OLD Ropafadzo Gumbo who is physically disabled started school during the second term last year, which marked the start of her journey to realising her dream of being a doctor.  Ropafadzo was diagnosed with Ostogenesis Imprefecta (OI) in 2017. This is a genetic bone disorder that is present at birth. It is also known as brittle bone disease. A child born with OI may have soft bones that break (fracture) easily or bones that are not formed normally among other problems. OI prevents the body from building strong bones. As a result of her condition, her mother says Ropafadzo has been hospitalised countless times and she would sometimes spend up to six weeks in hospital. This made it difficult for her to lead a normal life. She could not go to school or play with other children as her bones would continuously fracture. Endless medical expenses made it difficult for her parents to buy her a wheelchair. In order to have her condition improved, Ropafadzo has undergone four operations since 2018 to help straighten her legs. She is set to undergo another operation soon. Her parents took her to Cure Orthopaedic Hospital in Bulawayo last year in September and that was when Ropafadzo’s condition improved. The hospital which opened in January last year is the first and only hospital to provide free orthopaedic care to children with disabilities. Orthopaedics is a branch of medicine that focuses on the musculoskeletal system. Ropafadzo’s mother, Mrs Dorrica Gumbo said she took her daughter to Cure Orthopaedic Hospital where she received medication to help strengthen her bones. She said her daughter has not experienced a fracture ever since. Ropafadzo has undergone two surgeries at the hospital. Mrs Gumbo said her daughter accessed medical services for free which enabled her to save money for a wheelchair. “Ropa had her first fracture when she was a month old. When she was born I thought all was well until I realised that she wasn’t developing well. She was frequently having fractures and at the age of two she was diagnosed with Ostogenesis Imprefecta. She couldn’t play with others as she would fracture. Sometimes she would fracture just by moving around,” she said. Mrs Gumbo added: “For the greater part of her life, Ropafadzo has been in and out of hospital. Sometimes she would stay up to six weeks admitted in hospital. This disrupted her life in a great way. Her condition only started getting better last year after I took her to Cure Orthopaedic Hospital.” Ropafadzo underwent her first surgery in 2018 followed by the second one in 2019 at the Gwanda Provincial Hospital where she had rods placed in her legs in order to strengthen them. This however, proved to be a temporary solution. In November last year she underwent another operation at Cure Orthopaedic Hospital to straighten and strengthen her left leg. Her last operation was in February which was done to straighten her right leg. Mrs Gumbo said her daughter could now move around as she has a wheelchair. She said without the wheelchair it was going to be difficult for Ropafadzo to attend school. Mrs Gumbo said it has been painful for her to watch her daughter go through all this pain. She said Ropafadzo is a very intelligent child and her wish was to send her to an ideal school where she could get appropriate education. Ropafadzo is doing her ECD B at Jahunda Primary School. “My daughter is an enthusiast. She is very intelligent and she loves school. She used to ask me when she would be able to go to school as she always envied her peers who were learning. Her condition doesn’t bother her at all. She has a fighting spirit and she has a strong heart,” she said. Ms Gumbo added: “My desire would be to send my daughter to an appropriate school which caters for children with disability. I want her to receive the best education because I know that she will attain great heights in life.” Ropafadzo said it was her desire to become a doctor. She said it had always been her desire to go to school. She said it pained her to see her peers attending school while she was at home. Ropafadzo said she was confident that she would do well in school. She said her able-bodied peers could outsmart her in anything that needed physical strength but not in school work. “I’m glad to be attending school and each day I look forward to going to school. I want to be a doctor when I grow up. Other children stare at me but that doesn’t bother me,” said the bold girl. — @DubeMatutu