The Chronicle Business Reporter
FARMERS should take advantage of available agri-business advisory services and livestock insurance cover to mitigate against climatic change related hazards and cushion themselves against potential losses.  Stanbic Bank Zimbabwe’s head of agribusiness, Mr Tawanda Maposah, said their organisation has already set up an agribusiness unit to offer financial solutions to commercial farmers. The intervention is meant to ensure farmers protect and maximise their investments. “We have a comprehensive portfolio of advisory services, which covers a diverse section of the economy and Zimbabwe being an agro-driven economy, one such sector in which we provide viable financial solutions is agriculture,” he said. “To that end, commercial famers can take advantage of our experienced bankers from the agribusiness unit for solid financial solutions.” Mr Maposah said cattle farmers, in particular, should insure their livestock against diseases such as anthrax, Foot and Mouth and January disease, which have been wiping out the cattle head in various parts of the country over the last few years. About 200 cattle are said to have succumbed to anthrax in 2020 while hundreds more died due to January disease that hit many parts of the country, according to official estimates. January disease is still a cause of concern countrywide with parts of Mashonaland West and Masvingo being the hardest hit.
Anthrax has also affected Gokwe, Nkayi, Gutu, Bikita, Marondera, Mazowe, Chegutu, Makonde and Sanyati. Stanbic Bank head of client solutions, Mr Tich Zuze said the Standard Bank Group subsidiary was working with insurance partners to provide comprehensive insurance cover, which not only protects cattle but extends to other services. “While anthrax, foot and mouth and January disease on cattle are the major concern, the livestock insurance cover extends to accidental death, emergency slaughter on advice of a recognised veterinary surgeon and theft of livestock in raising units or paddocks,” he said. Livestock covered include dairy cattle, beef cattle, poultry, pigs, sheep and goats. According to the bank, cattle can also be insured against a wide range of other perils such as fire, smoke and lightning. Cattle are also covered against impact by road vehicles or railway locomotive, snake bites, accidental electrocution, non-political riot and strikes, malicious injury, flooding, earthquake and storm damage, said Mr Zuze. “The benefits of the cover include protection from loss of valuable animals as well as affordable cover as it is tailor made to an individual’s needs at competitive rates. “As for the cost, the premiums are based on one’s needs and business risk profile,” said Mr Zuze.