The Chronicle Leonard Ncube in Victoria Falls
TOURIST arrivals are on the increase in Victoria Falls with hotels and lodges reporting a jump in numbers following the recent removal of the PCR test requirements by Government.  Cabinet recently resolved to scrap PCR test requirements for all returning residents and visitors provided they are fully vaccinated against Covid-19. This was followed by gazetting of new regulations by the Ministry of Health and Child Care through Statutory Instrument 67 of 2022, where vaccinated travellers are allowed to enter or leave the country. Those who are not vaccinated are required to produce a negative PCR test valid for not more than 48 hours. In an interview, Hospitality Association of Zimbabwe (HAZ) president for Matabeleland North Mr Anald Musonza who is also general manager for Victoria Falls Safari Lodge said there have been positive changes in occupancies since last week’s announcement. There has also been an increase in human traffic on the streets of Victoria Falls compared to previous months during the lockdown. This coincides with start of the peak period in the tourism industry where traditionally arrivals would increase as travellers are attracted by Southern Africa winter weather. A lot of people postponed their trips from 2019 and last year and some had already paid before Covid-19 hit. “It’s going to be with immediate effect to see the uplift in tourist arrivals because everybody else has not been able to travel freely in the two years,” said Mr Musonza. “Soon after the announcement we already started seeing an increase in our bookings and occupancies within our destinations. So, we foresee that there will be an immediate increase in tourist arrivals into our country. “Walk around Victoria Falls, you can see that the mix of tourists has started changing where previously 100 percent were locals but now, we can see internationals and regionals starting to come through.” Mr Musonza was speaking after a clean-up exercise at Kazungula Border Post by various stakeholders in the tourism industry. Hwange Rural District Council (HRDC), whose jurisdiction the port is located, and the Environmental Management Agency (EMA) mobilised various stakeholders to clean the port and spruce up its image, which gives a good impression of the country. Those who participated at the Clean-up exercise were from EMA, HRDC, Zimbabwe Parks and Wildlife Management Authority, Zimbabwe National Army, police, President’s Department, Ministry of Youth, Sport, Arts and Recreation, Department of Immigration, Zimbabwe Revenue Authority, port health, veterinary services and plant quarantine, clearing agents and informal businesses operating at the border. Victoria Falls Safari Lodge, Matetsi River Hotel, Bush Tracks and Shearwater Adventures were some of the tourism industry players that took part in the clean-up. Mr Musonza said Kazungula, as one of the most important border posts in the country linking with Botswana, Zambia, Namibia, South Africa and the region, should be kept clean. “As you come into our destination Zimbabwe, all our ports of entry need to be clean and welcoming. Kazungula is one of the busiest border posts because all tourists that visit Victoria Falls go through it as they come in or when they go for day trips in Botswana’s Chobe National Park,” he said. Mr Musonza said Victoria Falls’ economy is based on tourism and wildlife hence the need for respect for the environment and adoption of sustainable waste management strategies by all stakeholders. He called for a change of culture by locals and travellers to avoid littering. – @ncubeleon