The Chronicle Leonard Ncube in Victoria Falls
LOCAL churches have come together to form the Interreligious Association of Peace and Development (IAPD) whose aim is to foster unity among citizens and help Government implement national development programmes.  Bishop Albert Chikuni of Family Life Ministries International is the founding president of IAPD which was established in July last year. IAPD has set structures in all the 10 provinces and is officially launching the chapters with a vision to achieve sustainable peace and development through uniting religions. Bishop Chikuni said IAPD vision is rooted in the country’s Constitution which talks about national unity, peace and stability hence the need for the church to complement Government efforts to develop the country. The idea is to unite Zimbabweans from various religions in order to carry out peace initiatives and activities towards sustainable national peace and development. IAPD is already working with ministries of Information, Publicity and Broadcasting Services, Defence and War Veterans Affairs, Health and Child Care, Justice, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. Bishop Chikuni said religious leaders have partnered Government to the push national agenda. “This is an organisation for every peace loving Zimbabwean regardless of religious affiliation. We don’t dwell on doctrines but on issues of national development hence we are united by the vision of the nation,” said Bishop Chikuni. Each province has a provincial peace coordinator. “We appointed provincial peace coordinators in each province and they were instructed to come up with district and provincial structures which we are commissioning. Only Mashonaland West and Harare provinces chapters are yet to be launched,” he said. Manicaland launched in August last year, Bulawayo in September, Midlands, Mashonaland Central and Mashonaland East in December, Masvingo in February this year, Matabeleland South last week and Matabeleland North on Saturday. Victoria Falls based Mr Philani Moyo of the United African Apostolic Church is the Matabeleland North peace coordinator. About 26 churches were represented at the Matabeleland North launch on Saturday in Victoria Falls. Bishop Simelelebona Nyoni of Nguva Yokupedzisira Apostolic Church of God the church is trying to fulfil Government dreams and aspirations. “Vision 2030 cannot be realised by Government alone but it needs all of us to work with the Government,” he said. – @ncubeleon