The Chronicle Lumbidzani Dima/Sikhulekelani Moyo, Chronicle Reporters WOMEN’S Affairs, Community, Small and Medium Enterprises Development, Sithembiso Nyoni has raised concern over an increase in the number of young girls who are being sexually exploited in Bulawayo. This comes after police recently raised concern over an increase in rape cases countrywide where women and girls are being sexually abused by known relatives, friends and landlords. Launching the #It has to stop movement at City Pentecostal Assembly in the city on Saturday, the Minister said the exploitation is fuelled by national and international events hosted in the city, as well as the Covid-19-induced lockdowns. The lockdown regulations, which restricted family members, including girls, to their homes to curb the spread of the pandemic, exposed the girls to intra-familial child sexual abuse. “Covid-19 scourge has seen a rise in SGBV (sexual and gender-based violence) and increased prevalence of drug abuse due to the negative effects of the lockdowns which were put in place to contain the spread of Covid-19. It has also been observed that there is an increase in numbers of young girls who are being sexually exploited here in Bulawayo and this is because the city is hosting national and international events. Women and girls are being trafficked to other countries and some experience sexual exploitation,” she said. The #It has to stop movement is run by the Women Association of Survivors (WAS), meant to fight against SGBV and uplifting survivors of GBV. Minister Nyoni said the movement complements Government’s effort in the fight against GBV and drug abuse. President Mnangagwa has declared war against drug abuse, especially among the youth. Minister Nyoni said the movement will have a great impact on society as it comes as an effort towards achieving gender equality and equity. “Drug abuse contributes negatively in the fight against GBV. Globally it has been established that violence against women has a negative impact on their personal growth and that negates development in communities and the nation as a whole,” said Minister Nyoni. She urged organisations to continue fighting against SGBV and drug abuse among young women and girls. The founder of WAS, Ms Kudakwashe Kunzekweguta said #It has to stop, is fighting for an end to GBV, early child marriages and human trafficking. She said they formed their organisation in July 2017 as a platform to offer psycho-social support to young women and girls who are survivors of GBV. She challenged everyone to be each other’s keeper. “It is our mandate as individuals to protect one another, whether female or male because for a nation to grow and fully function we all need everyone to be emotionally well.  Let us be watchdogs, men please stand up and protect these women and advise each other against abusing women,” said Ms Kunzekweguta. She advised society to change ways when it comes to dealing with GBV victims. She challenged people to now look at the mindset of the abuser, and not the victim, in order to reduce GBV cases as well as the stigmatisation that hovers around victims who speak out. “We want to reduce stigma and fear regarding the disclosure GBV, most women do not speak up because we are quick to judge them, when one comes out and says I was sexually abused, the question they are asked is what were you wearing, where were you. Why are we worried about the position of the woman and what she did and not the position of the rapist? Just offer help to someone, not to bombard them with questions, let us all try by all means to look at the perpetrator’s mindset,” said Ms Kunzekweguta. She added that they want to increase the self-esteem of victims because the abusers first disarm their mindset telling them they are not good enough. Therefore, they have made it their duty to rebuild that self-esteem and boost confidence. A GBV survivor who spoke during the event Mrs Lizinethi Beta advised GBV survivors, victims and all women to learn to stand up on their own without depending on men who will abuse them knowing very well that they provide for them. “Those who survived domestic violence and gender-based abuse should stand up and find something to do because mostly abuse comes when the perpetrators know that the victim depends on them and cannot go anywhere after abuse,” she said.