The Chronicle Mbulelo Mpofu, Showbiz Reporter
DUBAI-based sommelier Joe Mangena led the restaurant that he manages, Gohan to a Favourite Japanese Restaurant gong at the recently-held What’s On Awards Dubai. What’s On Awards are United Arab Emirates’ largest food and entertainment industry awards, and the only awards voted for by the public. They are held over two cities of Abu Dhabi and Dubai and have categories that comprise entertainment, restaurants, food concept, nightlife and leisure. Held at the Dubai Media City Amphitheatre, the awards united captains of the emirate’s most elite places to eat, and have fun. Gohan was initially chosen under two categories, the Favourite Japanese Restaurant and the Favourite Bar. Gohan lost the latter to Siddharta Lounge by Buddha-Bar. The restaurant thrives on Japanese street food with a menu that includes skewers, sushi and gyoza. Speaking to Chronicle Showbiz from Dubai, Mangena said he dedicates the award to all Zimbabweans who voted for Gohan at the awards.  “I’m over the moon right now because of the love that Zimbabweans showed us by voting for our restaurant. Early on this year, we rallied them to vote for us and they did. This is a humbling gesture and one can only thank people for the love, this award is for them. “However, we’re a little bit disappointed that we didn’t win the Favourite Bar award but fair play to Siddharta Lounge by Buddha-Bar for bagging the gong. As our motto goes, ‘Go-Han or Go Home’ the latter was not an option and people back home made it happen for us,” said the Bulawayo-born wine wizard. Mangena boasts of a career spanning more than a decade in the winery and food business. He has been in the UAE for the past eight years. As the icing on top, Gohan’s chef from Mauritius, Chef Mevish Appadoo won the prestigious Chef of the Year award for his exploits at the Japanese restaurant. Fellow Gohan chef, Gilles Bosquet also won the Corporate Chef of the Year, a confirmation of Gohan’s superiority. – @eMKlass_49