The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
BULAWAYO Chiefs head coach Nilton Terroso has distanced himself from the firing of assistant coaches Mark Mathe and Farai Tawachera, saying it was purely an administrative decision and not his recommendation.  Mathe and Tawachera were released by Chiefs last week while Terroso was in his native Portugal attending a Uefa Pro Licence coaching course, with the club citing the pair’s failure to match expectations. Conspiracy theories started doing the rounds that Mathe and Tawachera were sacked for allegedly sabotaging the team. Terreso, who arrived just before kick-off in his side’s one-all draw against Ngezi Platinum Stars at Luveve Stadium on Sunday, denied having any input in changes to the technical bench. “The decision was made by the club and I was made aware of everything going forward. I have been away for two weeks. In terms of comments, I won’t say anything now. I have always said at every press conference that the responsibility for the results is mine. You can speak to the assistant coaches that left. It’s disappointing, but it’s something that as a team we have to move on from,” said Terroso. “I landed at the airport and came straight to the game. I don’t know the coach (Thulani Sibanda) who has come in; I only met him 20 minutes before the game started. I do not know him personally and I am yet to meet him properly.” Despite results not favouring his side, Terreso insists he is not under any pressure. “I don’t feel the pressure. I am only focused on what is my responsibility and that is to get this team playing better. As long as I have the players playing for me, then I am happy with what I am doing. I was away doing a Uefa Pro Licence and that is the reason I need to be absent at times during the course of the season,” said Terroso. There had been higher expectations for Chiefs after the introduction of Terreso, as a lot of business was done during the transfer window in which the likes of Kelvin Madzongwe, Obriel Chirinda and the Moyo twins Kelvin and Elvis were signed. Chiefs find themselves in 13th place on the league table with 10 points from 10 encounters consisting of four draws, four losses and two wins. — @innocentskizoe