The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Chronicle Reporter MINISTER of Women’s Affairs, Community, Small and Medium Enterprises Development, Dr Sithembiso Nyoni yesterday visited various retail shops and distributors of the National Dress Fabric in Bulawayo and expressed satisfaction with their work. On Sunday, Dr Nyoni said the National Dress Fabric is now available across the country, with various shops, Government entities and the National Gallery of Zimbabwe Craft Shop having the cloth. Since Bulawayo is hosting the Independence Day main celebrations at Barbourfields Stadium, it is Government’s hope that people wear the National Dress Fabric in different designs come April 18. Dr Nyoni’s tour started early in the morning at the National Gallery of Zimbabwe in Bulawayo, where the National Dress Fabric can be found and ordered from, then she visited Pamela Creations where the African wear specialists have already tailored outfits using the cloth. Dr Nyoni met the staff there and Mrs Pamela Mwapaura, who runs the outlet, said the Minister’s visit was a vote of confidence for her and her business. She said the demand is high for the National Dress Fabric as outfits and some rolls of cloth have run out. “The visit by the Minister to my shop was very empowering as a woman who is in business. Business is brisk for my shop and the black coloured National Dress Fabric has run out, and I was calling the Ministry’s offices so that I can get it. We are hoping that there is a steady supply of the material for the market so that we can meet the demand. “I make outfits using the fabric and also sell it from the roll. After the Minister left my shop some of the dresses were sold that were displayed on the window,” said Mrs Mwapaura. Dr Nyoni then moved to Heavenly Rose Designers where Ms Thoko Makubile, who participated at the National Dress Fabric fashion show in Harare last year, was busy making outfits. She explained to the Minister that they were getting orders from the diaspora. “We received the fabric this past Saturday and we have started working. We are making various designs as per order and especially those who are in the diaspora. This is to further market the National Dress Fabric outside, so that people know that we have our own fabric. Also, we are targeting schools for holidays, such as Africa Day and instead of using other countries’ prints, we now have our own. I have a daughter at school and I’ll make an outfit for my child and use her to advertise it to her peers and other parents at the school,” said Ms Makubile.  She said they would take advantage of holidays like Africa Day to further market the National Dress Fabric. Thereafter, Dr Nyoni visited Zilch Investments run by Ms Sikhanyiso Dlodlo-Manyathela to assess how the small business can distribute the fabric and designs. Dr Nyoni said she was satisfied with what she had seen adding that more fabric will be brought to Bulawayo to meet demand. “There are more National Dress Fabric cloths that are coming as we are expecting a consignment from Harare. I’m very satisfied with what I have seen so far, where there are distribution points it just means that King Fisher must supply the people with the National Dress Fabric. “Now, everyone can go to King Fisher and they can roll out the National Dress Fabric to the people. The people of Bulawayo are encouraged to look for the fabric at the points that we told them about, buy and make or get tailor made outfits. This is so that come Independence Day everyone is dressed beautifully in the National Dress Fabric in various designs,” said Dr Nyoni. President Emmerson Mnangagwa, launched the National Dress Fabric two years ago, at a colourful event at State House, in Harare, marking the first time that the country has been able to settle on a national dress style since 1980. First Lady Amai Auxillia Mnangagwa spearheaded the search for the National Dress Fabric after embarking on comprehensive consultations with different stakeholders and ethnic groups from all the country’s 10 provinces. The National Dress Fabric encompasses national symbols such as the Zimbabwe Bird, the National Flag and the Chevron pattern. Designs of the fabric were showcased at a glamorous fashion show held at State House. Before the National Dress Fabric was not readily available, but now various shops and Government institutions will have the cloth. It was being sold in foreign currency, which was out of the reach of most, but it now costs around $1 300 per metre and people can pay using swipe, EcoCash or cash. The next consignment from King Fisher, will cost around $700. — Follow on Twitter @bonganinkunzi