The Chronicle Patrick Chitumba, Midlands Bureau Chief
THE national mobile registration exercise was yesterday characterised by high turnout at Gweru District Registrar General’s Office in the city centre and low turnout at other centres across the city.  The Civil Registry Department is conducting a countrywide mobile registration exercise which started on April 1 and ends on September 30. During the exercise, the department is issuing birth certificates, death certificates and national identity documents. The mobile registration exercise is providing an opportunity for all citizens to obtain national identity documents to enable them to register as voters in next year’s 2023 harmonised general elections. In Gweru, the exercise is being held at four static centres namely Mkoba 1 Secondary School in Mkoba 13, Mpumelelo Primary School in Mkoba 15, Lundi Park Primary School in Lundi Park and at the Registrar General’s office in CBD. Mobile teams are supposed to be working from 7am to 5pm but at Lundi Park Primary school yesterday, the team had not set up for the day at around 10am when a Chronicle news crew passed through. In the city centre, there was a very high turnout which saw some people being turned away as the office is only serving 60 people per day. Some people interviewed at the office said they arrived as early as 4.30AM. “I was here by 4.30AM and the security guard wasn’t giving cards. She started giving us cards around 6AM and I was number 40. Now it’s past 11AM and on being served, my fingerprints have been collected for example and I hope by 1PM I will be carrying my national identification card,” said Mr Emmanuel Tinaye from Ascot suburb. Gweru Times senior reporter Norman Dururu, who was also queuing for an ID, said the exercise was time consuming. “I think there is need for less paperwork with regards to this process of acquiring an ID. I think they should also open online applications, maybe it will go a long way to bridge a gap in terms of addressing the general delays. The number of people they are serving per day 60 is not much considering the backlog we have as a country,” he said. At Mkoba 1 Secondary School, Brandon Dube (17) from Mkoba 13 said he was looking forward to having an ID. “This is my first ID and I am happy that there is this blitz. I am happy with the process because I got here at around 8AM and it’s around 12PM now and they have started serving me. I think by 1PM I will be done,” he said. At Mpumelelo Primary School, Sharon Tshuma (17), who just got her Advanced Level results and is looking forward to enrolling at tertiary institutions, commended Government for the programme. “The registration process is getting better and is improving a lot of lives, especially of the youths. It is giving the youths a chance to get the documentation to use in advancing their education and also look for jobs. I think there is a need for the enhancement of equipment they are using here so that they are faster, so that they assist the youths and the elderly people in the shortest possible time,” she said.