The Chronicle Yoliswa Dube-Moyo, Matabeleland South Bureau Chief
PREPARATIONS for the provincial Independence Day celebrations in Matabeleland South province are on course with calls for Zimbabweans to commemorate the day in peace, love and unity.  Running under the theme, “Zimbabwe at 42: Leaving no one and no place behind”, the country will for the first time in 42 years hold the national Independence Day celebrations outside the capital, Harare. The theme dovetails with the Second Republic’s drive towards promotion of national unity, devolution and decentralisation. The national event will be at Barbourfields Stadium in Bulawayo. President Mnangagwa will lead the celebrations which will include a football match between fierce rivals Highlanders and Dynamos. After the football match, members of the public will be treated to a music gala  and various artistes will perform. Before the main event, President Mnangagwa will host a children’s party at State House. The provincial event will be held at Phelandaba Stadium in Gwanda where Provincial Affairs and Devolution Minister Abednico Ncube will read the President’s speech. The activities at the stadium will include drills and marches by members of the Zimbabwe Defence Forces and a soccer match. There will be district events at each of the seven districts across the province. Minister Ncube said preparations for the provincial independence celebrations were going on well. He encouraged people to come in their numbers to celebrate their big day. “Zimbabwe did not come on a silver platter. People sacrificed their lives for the country to attain independence. We lost beloved ones for Zimbabwe to be free from colonial oppression therefore we’ll be celebrating our freedom,” said Minister Ncube. He said Zimbabweans must take pride in the fact that the country is a sovereign nation. “Independence brought with it many opportunities for the black majority. Our people have been empowered and now enjoy the benefits of their resources such as land which was not the case before independence,” said Minister Ncube. – @Yolisswa.