The Chronicle According to Proverbs 10:22, many people do not realize that cars and houses and riches are not the blessing; they are ‘a result of the blessing.’ To a Jewish child, it is not correct to point at a new car or house and say, “look at my blessing” because “the blessing of God” is intangible and immaterial. It is invisible to the naked eye. The blessing is the stem and a car is a fruit of the blessing. Just as you cannot see the wind but can tell when it passes because of its force and the way it blows away papers and you cannot point at the paper and say, “look at the wind”, you cannot point at tangible and material things and call them blessings. The blessing is what empowers you to obtain material riches. The blessing is the spiritual endowment that comes upon someone and is an empowerment to succeed.  It is not tangible and it cannot be seen. The Bible says that ‘the blessing maketh one rich.’ This means instead of toiling you are to put your effort into looking for the blessing. Jewish people devote their time in seeking the blessing. They understand the power of the blessing and will do anything to get it. To them the issue of a blessing is never taken for granted or lightly, it is a deep, serious spiritual matter. In Genesis 24 we see Abraham sending a messenger to go and find a wife for his son Isaac. Genesis 24:53 tells us that Abraham’s servant (messenger) gave Rebekah jewelry of silver, gold, and clothing. He even gave precious things to Rebekah’s brother and to her mother. All these things were manifest in Abraham’s life because he had the blessing. Genesis 24:35
The LORD has blessed my master greatly, and he has become great; and He has given him flocks and herds, silver and gold, male and female servants, and camels and donkeys. (NKJV) When the blessing comes upon you there is no way that you will remain insignificant and obscure. We see that Abraham became great and he was influential. He also had male and female servants. The blessing will take you from being an employee to being an employer. God mentioned all these things in the Bible because He wants us to have them. He desires us to have the blessing that He gave to Abraham. God Bless…. eaglelifeassembly@yahoo.com