The Chronicle Michael Magoronga, Midlands Correspondent
GOVERNMENT is working flat out to ensure the first wheat crop is planted this winter at Mutange Irrigation Scheme in Gokwe South District, Minister of State responsible for Monitoring of Special Agriculture Projects, Davis Marapira has said.  Speaking during his tour of the scheme recently, the first of its kind in Gokwe, Minister Marapira said the scheme should plant its first winter wheat crop this coming winter without fail as Government moves to ensure food security. Established in 2017, the 134-hectare scheme has been lying idle after a 500kV transformer was struck by lightning soon after installation. The replacement of the transformer took long hence there was no activity at the scheme. Minister Marapira said Government will see to it that the transformer is replaced in time for the first crop to be planted this winter. “We would have failed as a Government if that transformer is not replaced in time for winter wheat. We cannot have a Government funded scheme lying idle for five years as that will be throwing money down the drain. I will do all within my powers to ensure that the first winter wheat is planted on this scheme,” he said. The scheme is targeting to put 70 hectares under wheat. The supply dam Mutange was completed in 2016 and state-of-the-art centre pivots were installed at the irrigation scheme long back but it remains a white elephant because there is no electricity. Minister Marapira urged stakeholders at the scheme to guard against vandalism of the infrastructure. “Let us all guard our equipment jealously and expose the culprits involved in acts of vandalism. I am told the fence and some centre pivots have been vandalised, such moves are backward and deter development. This scheme is meant to transform the lives of Gokwe people,” said Minister Marapira. Government has embarked on a drive to revitalise irrigation schemes across the country. The Mutange Irrigation scheme was wholly funded by Government under the PSIP which seeks to ensure that every district has at least 200 hectares under irrigation. Midlands Provincial Irrigation Engineer, Shingirirai Zano said Mutange Irrigation Scheme was the first of its kind in Gokwe and the second biggest irrigation scheme in the province. He said plans were afoot to extend the hectarage to 200, adding that state-of-the-art equipment was installed in line with climate change requirements. “We have 134 hectares but we have plans to increase the hectarage to 200. Three pumps have already been installed as well as five centre pivots,” he said. The scheme is set to benefit about 270 families.