The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
CHAMPIONSHIP pacesetters Chicken Inn FC have to guard against complacency when they take on Castle Lager Premier Soccer League whipping boys Whawha at Ascot Stadium in Gweru this weekend.  Chicken Inn remain on top of the league table with 23 points from 10 matches while Whawha are at the basement with five points. Gamecocks’ gaffer Joey Antipas is aware of the danger of undermining their opponents because of the position they occupy on the log and wants his charges to be psychologically prepared for the tie. The last time the two sides met was in 2015, the season Chicken Inn were crowned champions and the Gamecocks won the first match 2-0 in Bulawayo and deadlocked the reverse tie 1-1 in Gweru. From the players that were involved in the 2015 duels, Chicken Inn still have three, captain Moses Jackson, veteran defender Passmore Bernard and winger George Majika. Forwards Albert Matewu and Nigel Jukulile are the only survivors from the 2015 Whawha squad. Chicken Inn survived a late scare from Manica Diamonds in their 3-3 stalemate last weekend while Whawha narrowly lost 0-1 to FC Platinum. Bernard and Jackson were on target for Chicken Inn last weekend and the other Gamecocks’ goal came from Bret Amidu. “Nothing has changed in terms of what we want. We want consistency in terms of results. We always take every game seriously and nothing changes because we’re playing Whawha. We respect them just like any other Premiership side and what I’ve been knocking into my players’ heads is the need to be psychologically prepared and avoid complacency. In the past seasons, there are games we’ve lost because the boys underrated opponents and we don’t want that,” said Antipas. Chicken Inn welcome back central defender Nielson Ketala who missed the Manica Diamonds draw due to suspension. Ketala’s absence in last weekend’s match was hugely felt as the Gamecocks’ backline was breached three times for the first time this season. Bernard is likely to be relegated to the bench to pave way for Ketala to partner Jackson in central defence. Whawha have the most porous defence in the league and as a result conceded 28 goals. They have to closely monitor the visiting pair of Brian Muza and Amidu to prevent further worsening their situation. Fixtures Tomorrow: Harare City vs Tenax CS FC (National Sports Stadium)
Saturday: Herentals vs Triangle United (National Sports Stadium), Black Rhinos vs ZPC Kariba (Sakubva), Ngezi Platinum Stars vs Dynamos (Baobab), Bulawayo City vs FC Platinum (Barbourfields), Whawha vs Chicken Inn (Ascot)
Sunday: Highlanders vs Cranborne Bullets (Barbourfields), Manica Diamonds vs Bulawayo Chiefs (Sakubva), Caps United vs Yadah (National Sports Stadium)
-@ZililoR