The Chronicle Leonard Ncube in Victoria Falls
THE removal of negative PCR test requirement on travellers entering or leaving the country is expected to boost tourism confidence and attract more arrivals, industry leaders have said. For two years the tourism sector has been in the doldrums as effects of the global travel restrictions due to Covid-19, took a toll on it. Last Tuesday, Government announced the removal of PCR negative test as a pre-requisite, bringing joy to the industry that had been lobbying for removal of tight restrictions. Under the new regulations, arrivals will now be required to only produce proof of vaccination. The PCR test costs US$60 and this was contributing significantly to travel costs. The announcement came on the eve 30 March, the same date the first lockdown was announced by President Mnangagwa in 2020. German airline Eurowings Discover launched its maiden flight to Victoria Falls on the same date on Wednesday, adding to the excitement.  A new helicopter flight tourism product was also introduced on Wednesday through a partnership between Zimparks and MJ Air Helicopters and Environment, Climate, Tourism and Hospitality Industry Minister Nqobizitha Mangaliso Ndlovu presided over the launch at the Kazungula aerodrome. “On this day two years ago, the Government of Zimbabwe announced its first lockdown to combat the spread of the virus. Just yesterday, the Government announced the removal of the negative PCR test as a pre-requisite for entering the country if you are vaccinated,” said the minister. “Today we had the inaugural flight direct from Europe. The tourism sector greatly appreciates this milestone.” Hospitality Association of Zimbabwe national president, Mr Farai Chimba, said the PCR negative test was the final hindrance that needed to be taken off. “As industry we welcome the great news about removal of PCR requirement. For us this is quite significant because this was the last barrier limiting travel into the country,” he said. “We all saw that in the region we were lagging behind in terms of access and this will go a long way in making travel not only cheaper for the traveller but also the access into the destination without some of the hindrances.” Mr Chimba said the removal of PCR and mandatory quarantine complements the opening up of the borders. “This has been the best news this year in terms of tourism and travel and it is definitely a big success. So, we expect our numbers to now start growing not only from international market but also from a regional perspective where there is now easy access,” he said. “What we anticipate is a drive towards vaccination, which still remains very important for tourism globally.” Tourism Business Council of Zimbabwe national president, Mr Wengai Nhau, said the industry was very excited. “This is a huge achievement for tourism and everyone in the industry is excited. It will boost confidence among travellers and in the industry itself and we now anticipate a flow of tourists because this has been the challenge for travelling, which is why we have been lobbying Government,” he said. -@ncubeleon