The Chronicle Leonard Ncube in Victoria Falls
DZIMBAHWE Guest Lodge in Victoria Falls has once again been voted the best in the country for its quality service and affordable rates to domestic and international clients. This is the second consecutive year Dzimbahwe Guest Lodge, owned by the Dzimbanhete family, has won the “Best Country Lodge” accolade. The Global Tourism Awards are conducted annually by industry professionals around the world with the aim of recognising the best performers in each section in the tourism and travel industry. Dzimbahwe Guest Lodge has 22 rooms and offers bed and breakfast and self-catering, which proprietor Mrs Judith Dzimbanhete said is unmatched. “After a thorough jury evaluation process, we are pleased and excited to announce Dzimbahwe Guest Lodge as a winner of Global Tourism Awards year 2022. “We wish Dzimbahwe Guest Lodge to reach new levels of prosperity and conquer even bigger heights for the years to come,” reads a recent notice announcing the award. “The award organisers said the hospitality industry is ready to reach new heights after the pandemic. “We strongly believe that this award winning will help you promote your hotel and increase bookings in the upcoming months.” Commenting, Mrs Dzimbanhete said the facility was excited by the honour. “What makes Dzimbahwe Guest Lodge unique is the quality personalised service we provide to our guests both domestic and international tourists at affordable rates,” she said. “This award we have won means that we are in the right track as far as service is concerned as we have won this award for two consecutive years.” The award comes just a week after destination Victoria Falls won a silver award for sustaining employees and community during the Covid-19 induced lockdowns. A number of other Victoria Falls hotels and lodges have been recognised before for their quality and exceptional service. Africa Albida Tourism-owned Victoria Falls Safari Lodge has won the Best Resort Hotel awarded by the Association of Zimbabwe Travel Agents (AZTA) while its sister facilities Lokuthula Lodges and Victoria Falls Safari Club were voted the Best Self Catering facility and Best Boutique before. Victoria Falls Hotel and A’ Zambezi River Lodge have also been recognised before. Matetsi Victoria Falls Luxury Safari Lodge was also the best African resort in the 2021 edition of the Travel & Leisure World’s Best Awards. – @ncubeleon