The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter A MACHETE-wielding Lupane man who allegedly force-marched a woman and her two children to his homestead at night and raped her in full view of one of them has been arrested for rape. Brighton Ndlovu (27) of Madonjwa Village in Chief Mabhikwa allegedly armed himself with a machete while in a drunken stupor and proceeded to the complainant’s place of resident where he ordered her to accompany him to his place of residence. The complainant is 25 years old and her identity has been concealed for ethical reasons. The alleged rape took place on March 25. Ndlovu had met the complainant on March 18 and proposed love to her and she agreed. The two did not meet again until the day of alleged rape. Ndlovu appeared for initial remand before Lupane resident magistrate Mr Ndumo Masuku who remanded him in custody to next week Thursday. The court advised Ndlovu to apply to the High Court for bail. Prosecuting, Mr Clive Gumbo said Ndlovu threatened to attack the complainant with the machete if she refused to go with him. “On the 18th day of March the accused proposed love to the complainant who accepted.  “On the 25th of March at 10pm, the accused who was drunk proceeded to the complainant’s place of residence. “He was armed with a machete,” said the prosecutor. The court was told that upon his arrival, Ndlovu knocked on the door while calling the complainant to open for him. The complainant opened the door and Ndlovu ordered her to wake her two children up and go with him to his place. The ages of the two children was not given. The complainant complied in fear of being killed as the accused was allegedly violent and was threatening to attack her with the machete, the court was told. Ndlovu allegedly force-marched the complainant and the two children to his homestead and passed by a neighbour’s place where they left one of the children before proceeding. Upon arrival at Ndlovu’s please of residence, he allegedly led the complainant to a kitchen hut where he ordered her to put her child on the floor and undress herself. He allegedly raped her once before ordering her to go back to her place of residence where she immediately informed her brother about what had happened. A report was made to the police leading to Ndlovu’s arrest.