The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter GOVERNMENT has sent a team to assess Binga Rural District Council’s suitability to be upgraded into a local board. This follows a request made by chiefs in Binga recently to President Mnangagwa that they felt Binga had grown as a local authority and deserve local board status. The chiefs first made the request when they met Zanu-PF Vice-President Cde Kembo Mohadi who had been sent by President Mnangagwa to meet traditional leadership ahead of the Head of State’s recent star rally in Siabuwa two weeks ago. The rally was part of the ruling party’s campaign ahead of recent by-elections. The chiefs presented a list of demands which they said were a representation of the aspirations of people in the district. Among them was the request for a local board status, a vocational training centre, school of nursing, a decent border post, science laboratories for schools and a community market among others. Speaking at the rally, President Mnangagwa said the Second Republic will attend to all the demands as he promised to visit Binga again. “Chiefs asked for a Binga Local Board, I have instructed the Minister of Local Government (July Moyo) to give them the Local Board they want,” he said. Binga District Development Co-ordinator Mr Land Siansole Kabome said a team from the Ministry of Local Government and Public Works visited Binga RDC last week. “The ministry sent officials last week to assess the suitability and we are waiting for a report from them,” he said. Ideally, once the local board status is granted, Binga RDC will relocate offices to Manjolo Business Centre close to 30km away. Manjolo is earmarked for upgrading into a town with decent accommodation, office space, businesses, a police station, and clinic among other developments, as part of the Bulawayo Kraal Irrigation Scheme development plan. A new coal mine being developed in Muchesu and the irrigation, both near Manjolo, are expected to be key economic activities to support growth of Manjolo.  Binga RDC chief executive Mr Joshua Muzamba said the report from the assessors will guide future operations. “We had a team that came from Head Office a week after the visit by President to assess Binga for a possibility of establishing a local board and we are actually waiting for feedback. On that (moving to Manjolo), they will advise, that’s an issue for policymakers even if we know that Manjolo will be developed into a future town especially with the new coal mine and Bulawayo Kraal Irrigation Scheme,” he said. Binga district population was 139 092 in 2012 when the last census was held and it is estimated that it has grown significantly over the last decade. Matabeleland North Provincial Affairs and Devolution Minister Richard Moyo said the province is ready to catapult Binga to growth. “We are ready for that once approved by Cabinet. The President said he is committed to fulfilling all demands made by chiefs in Binga and establishment of a local board is one of the issues. If granted the status, this will be good development for Binga,” he said. Matabeleland North has seven districts and 10 local authorities. Victoria Falls City and Hwange are the only urban centres. Hwange Local Board and Lupane Local Board are the only local boards. The rest are RDCs. — @ncubeleon