The Chronicle Leonard Ncube in Victoria Falls
“MY calling is to encourage youths to choose the right moral path in life.” These are the words of 19-year-old Buhlebemvelo Bhebhe who released her second gospel single last month.  An arts student, Buhle completed her Advanced Level studies at Mosi-oa-Tunya High School last year and is waiting for her results. She released her first single titled Limitless in 2020. It was posted on YouTube and also enjoyed airplay on radio stations. The second single which was recorded at Cruel Studio in Victoria Falls, is titled Soldier On. Buhle said the message she is sending to her peers is that they must soldier on despite the many challenges in life because there are many opportunities that come along with good behaviour and morals. A member of the Methodist Church, Buhle started singing at a tender age and managed to record her first single when she was  only 17 years old. “I recorded my first single in 2020 and the second one in March this year.” Buhle says she has taken a brief break as she waits for her results. “I don’t want my music career to disturb my education so once I receive my results and know the path that I’m taking with my education, I’ll continue singing,” said Buhle, who wishes to study law and says she expects no less than 15 points. She said balancing school and music has not been easy as the two are both demanding. “It hasn’t been easy balancing school work and music but I have always given priority to school work. I used to go to the studio during my spare time and on weekends. As we speak, I’m working on something, but I have to see my results first before returning to the studio,” said Buhle. The up-and-coming musician loves to motivate people and urges citizens never to give up in life. “My calling is to advocate for good moral behaviour and convince those who think they cannot make it in life that there’s hope and every reason to live. I got inspired by youths taking up music. “I chose gospel because of my background so I’m the voice of the voiceless youths out there,” said Buhle. She said it is not easy to compose a song that captures fans’ attention and in order to appeal to the youths, she uses Hip-hop. Mosi-oa-Tunya High School has produced Top Kings (twins Nkosenhle and Nkosilathi Ncube) who are now veterans in the music industry and have recorded several albums. Buhle’s mother who doubles up as her manager and promoter, teaches at Mosi-oa-Tunya. The school has produced many musicians and its choir has performed at various international events, some which were attended by Heads of State. – @ncubeleon