The Chronicle Chronicle Reporters
CHILDREN from various schools across districts in Matabeleland South and Matabeleland North provinces were hosted in Gwanda and Lupane for Independence parties on Sunday that ran concurrently with the national event which was presided over by President Mnangagwa at State House in Bulawayo.  In Matabeleland South, the Provincial Affairs and Devolution Minister Abednico Ncube said children were the torchbearers and it was important that they take part in national events. “We thank President Mnangagwa for the vision he has for our children as they are the future. Zimbabwe is important to us, we won this country after a tough battle and we’re independent today because of the sacrifices made by our fellow countrymen. Zimbabwe didn’t come on a silver platter and we must therefore guard our Independence jealously. Our children have drawn lessons from the President’s speech which they will take home and share with others,” said Minister Ncube. He encouraged pupils to take up science subjects such as Chemistry, Physics, Biology and Mathematics and build careers that help grow the country’s economy. “We need to continue capacitating our schools so that they’re fully equipped to teach science subjects. We want to raise more scientists, engineers and medical doctors from our province,” said Minister Ncube. One of the children in attendance, Charity Sithole from Plumtree High School said they were now enjoying freedom of speech and movement because of the gallant sons and daughters that sacrificed their lives to free the country. As girls and as black people in general, we’re now allowed to attend schools like Plumtree High School and other schools which were formerly a preserve of whites,” she said. Another pupil from Gwanda High School, Prudence Dube said the power of freedom has seen the country developing in all sectors of the economy. “As a result of Independence, women and children are now allowed to occupy spaces that they were not allowed before. Under the white man’s rule, people were not free to live their lives as they wished but they can now participate in various economic activities and contribute to the country’s development,” she said. The Gwanda Mayor Councillor Njabulo Siziba, Gwanda Rural District Council chief executive officer Mr Ranga Sibanda, Ministry of Primary and Secondary School officials, Provincial Development Committee members, senior Zanu-PF party members, service chiefs and teachers from the different schools in the province attended the party. In Matabeleland North, about 1 000 pupils drawn from nine primary and secondary schools gathered at Kusile Primary School in Lupane where they joined the rest of the country in celebrating the pre-Independence children’s party. The children were drawn from Makhovula, Mpofu, AMR, Mtshibini, Kusile and Lupane primary schools and Fatima High, Mtshibini Secondary and AMR Secondary schools. All the nine schools are in Lupane and represented the whole province. While the province sent some children to the national event in Bulawayo, the provincial party was aimed at making sure a majority of learners in the province also enjoy the children’s party. Matabeleland North Provincial Affairs and Devolution Minister Richard Moyo read President Mnangagwa’s speech. Minister Moyo thanked the President for taking Independence Day celebrations outside Harare for the first time since Independence. The children were treated to various kinds of entertainment including music and dance. They also took turns to recite poems dedicated to the country’s Independence and the theme for this years 42nd edition. The pupils spoke about the province’s natural resources which include methane gas, coal, timber and game which they said could be exploited to benefit the province.