The Chronicle Sikhulekelani Moyo, Business Reporter 
THE Government expects the improved investment in domestic value addition and beneficiation to drive the successful implementation of the US$8 billion Industry and Commerce Roadmap.  This is underpinned by the Zimbabwe National Industrialisation Policy and the Local Content Strategy, which are integral elements of the National Development Strategy (NDS1, a five-year blueprint that spans 2021 to 2025. Industry and Commerce Minister, Dr Sekai Nzenza, told delegates during a Parliamentary Portfolio Committee workshop on industry in Bulawayo on Thursday that comprehensive measures were being taken to transform the country’s industry. “The Ministry of Industry and Commerce is at an advanced stage in implementing the US$8 billion Industry and Commerce roadmap to develop of new industries leading to transformation and diversification of our local industry,” said Dr Nzenza in a speech read by her deputy, Cde Raj Modi. “In spite of the challenges, the ministry managed to register a number of milestones in the implementation of NDS1 2021-2025. We have come up with focal persons for all 10 NDS 1 value chains. These focal persons interact closely with the players in the value chains and enable the ministry to deal with any bottlenecks facing industry,” said Minister Nzenza. She said last year her ministry developed sector specific strategies to deal with the bottlenecks and enhance ease of doing business in the value chains. These include the Leather Sector Strategy, Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Strategy and Five-Year Fertiliser Import Substitution Roadmap. Under these strategies, she said the ministry is promoting import substitution, increased productivity, rural industrialisation and employment creation. “The Five-Year Fertiliser Import Substitution Roadmap has seen the Industrial Development Corporation of Zimbabwe (IDCZ) playing a pivotal role in local fertiliser production,” said Dr Nzenza. “Dorowa Minerals is producing phosphates for ZimPhos and in turn ZFC while G & W is producing lime. “The ministry is also completing the Cotton to Clothing Strategy, the Sugar Strategy and the Engineering Iron and Streel Strategy working hand in glove with the value chain players.” In an interview after the meeting, Industry and Commerce permanent secretary, Dr Mavis Sibanda, said the ministry has been visiting companies countrywide to check on investment. “We have been visiting companies and some of these include Coca-Cola and Varun Beverages Limited. Coca-Cola has invested a lot and Varun has invested into a new line of production,” she said. In Bulawayo she said Baker’s Inn was putting a new plant, which is worth about $20 million while National Foods was working on a similar venture. “This is a very positive development despite the challenges facing the economy and we want people to know that,” said Dr Sibanda. —@sikhulekelaniM1