The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter 
THE only lingering question was when it would arrive, and for Stanley Ngala, there was no better occasion to end his goal drought than score against Dynamos in the Uhuru Cup final at Barbourfields Stadium on Monday.  Ngala hit the back of the net with a well taken strike 10 minutes into the second-half after being set-up by substitute Washington Navaya, who robbed Godknows Murwira of the ball before teeing up Ngala. It was his second goal for Highlanders, having scored his first in February when they beat Whawha 2-0. Since then, Ngala had endured a goal drought that even coach Mandla Mpofu admitted the striker may be feeling the pressure and getting frustrated. However, throughout the torrid period for the big striker, Mpofu always insisted he trusts his forward to come good. “I am happy, I don’t want to lie. I am happy l managed to score against the mighty Dynamos on this special occasion, the Independence Cup final. It’s a huge relief to score after struggling to get goals. I have been playing well, but the goals were elusive. It’s not easy to please the Highlanders’ multitude, but I am happy I managed to do that today. “Obviously this is a morale booster and I am confident that this is the beginning of more goals to come. Now it’s back to putting in the work and hopefully I score more goals for the club,” said Ngala. Highlanders need to keep Ngala on the goal trail in the coming weeks and months as they endeavour to shake their way out of the mid-table. Most of Ngala’s critics accuse him of playing with his back to goal, but perhaps there is a need to understand his strength of holding up play. This hold-up brings other players into the game and constantly poses a threat to the opponent’s third due to runs made by the players. While he has to convert as well, players playing around him benefit more from his type of play if the combinations work well. Ngala has previously played for FC Platinum, Bulawayo Chiefs and Manica Diamonds as well as Mochudi Centre Chiefs in Botswana. He signed a three-year contract with Bosso at the beginning of the January transfer window. – @innocentskizoe