The Chronicle Yoliswa Dube-Moyo, Matabeleland South Bureau Chief
The Ntepe-Manama Community Radio Trust is appealing for financial assistance from various stakeholders as it has missed its April target to go on air due to monetary constraints. While the setting up of the broadcasting studio has been completed, more work is yet to be done to meet Broadcasting Authority of Zimbabwe (BAZ) recommendations.  The Community Radio Trust was last year given a list of recommendations by BAZ engineers to turn a section of the Manama Bible School into a studio before equipment can be handed over to them. Part of the work includes putting up soundproof walls, aluminium doors as well as installing a high traffic carpet and a broadcasting desk. Government recently issued licences in all broadcasting categories to diversify information dissemination and foster development in all spheres of society. To demonstrate its commitment, Government has been opening up all categories of licences including free to air, commercial and community radio stations. Ntepe-Manama Community Radio Trust programmes officer Ms Siphathisiwe Ncube said the acoustics for the studio were being set up. “We were delayed by the guys who were setting up the acoustics because we’ve been waiting for the material, they’re using for sound proofing from South Africa. The studio is ready but the soundproofing came in a bit later than we expected,” said Ms Ncube. She said engineers from BAZ are expected to visit the studio and inspect the soundproofing once it is completed. “We’re appealing for financial assistance so that we can purchase office furniture, pave the outside area so that dust doesn’t get into the studio as well as to secure the place. We also have to do signage from Gwanda up to Manama giving directions to the studio as well as branding of the building,” said Ms Ncube. Meanwhile, BAZ acting chief executive officer Mr Matthew Chakanyuka said one of the mandates of the broadcasting authority is to make sure that people have universal access to broadcasting services. “What we’ve done to address the issue of coverage is to make sure that communities residing towards the border areas where there are challenges of reception of radio and television services get coverage. As a regulator, we checked for those communities and decided to give them licences of a community nature that’s why in this area, we’ve made sure that there’s a community radio station for the Ntepe-Manama area,” said Mr Chakanyuka. “Secondly, under the digitalisation project, we’re going to revamp the FM network. Currently, the services in Gwanda cover a radius of 40km. Under the digitalisation project, we’re going to put high-powered transmitters which will cover a radius of 80 to 120km depending on the terrain.” The migration from analogue broadcasting to digital terrestrial television began in 2015. The digitalisation process is in compliance with international requirements. The main reason for the world’s migration to digital is to release valuable spectrum which can be used for other services. Spectrum is scarce therefore, more efficient use of the spectrum is necessary if more terrestrial telecommunications and broadcasting services are to be made available. — @Yolisswa