The Chronicle Lumbidzani Dima, Chronicle Reporter
‘‘ZIMBABWE at 42 — Leaving no one and no place behind’’, a very relevant theme for this year’s Independence celebrations given what has so far been achieved in efforts to ensure equality and inclusivity of everyone including people living with disabilities.  Senator Watson Khupe who represents people with disability in Parliament commended the decision to move the main national celebrations to the City of Kings and Queens as it confirms Government’s commitment to ensuring no place is left behind. “Bulawayo played host to the main celebrations and this was a confirmation to the city residents that Government is serious when it says no place will be left behind. We are moving forward together as a nation. In Kalanga we say: ‘Hango inobakiwa nebeni bayo’ and that is what should push us to put shoulder to the wheel as we build our nation,” he said. Senator Khupe said people living with disabilities were being discriminated against before Independence but a lot has been done to address this shortcoming during the last 42 years of Independence. “As a disabled person representing other disabled people in the country, I am happy that Zimbabwe is celebrating 42 years of Independence when a lot has been done to address our challenges. We suffered a lot during the liberation struggle as many of us were very vulnerable because of our disabilities,” he said. Sen Khupe commended the Second Republic in general and President Mnangagwa in particular, for launching the national disability policy which has seen people living with disabilities being included. “We thank the President for really demonstrating that his Government is committed to ensuring all citizens enjoy their rights. The highlight for 42 years was actually exhibited last year when the President appointed the first visually-impaired person to be a judge of the High Court, ” he said. Last year President Mnangagwa attended the annual disability expo held in Gweru to have an appreciation of the challenges facing people with disabilities. The President during the same year launched the Disability Policy which has been described as a very positive development meant to change the lives of people with disabilities. The policy is part of Government efforts to ensure the development path and the National Development Strategy 1 (NDS1) is disability-inclusive and acknowledges Diaspora engagement. President Mnangagwa said people with disabilities should not be viewed as charity cases but as individuals capable of contributing to the development of the country like any other citizen. The National Disability Policy is a culmination of consultations between Government and representatives of persons living with disabilities that began when President Mnangagwa met them in 2018. The Disability Policy is meant to ensure that disability programmes are mainstreamed in Government institutions and activities as required by the Constitution.