The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
ZIMBABWE Chess Federation (ZCF) president Collen Tongowona says they are expecting a massive turn out for this year’s Easter Open Chess tournament.  The Easter Open tournament has been played since the 1980s and is one of the biggest over-the-board chess tournaments on the national chess calendar, which at times draws participants from all over the Sadc region. The event will be held from April 15-18 in Harare at Joina City where it was hosted in 2021 courtesy of New World Property Managers. “Engagements with other potential co-sponsors are currently ongoing in a bid to boost the prize package for this auspicious competition. The Zimbabwe Chess Federation’s Health and Wellness Commission is also working tirelessly in order to put in place solid Covid-19 preventive measures in order to conduct the event in a safe and secure environment. The competition is expected to receive massive interest and participation from players across the country and when that happens, stiff competition is guaranteed,” said Tongowona. “In the past two years, it hasn’t been easy hosting such events due to the Covid-19 pandemic and the economic challenges it brought. This has taught us to value and cherish such moments. We expect a massive tournament and great competition. “We appreciate the support this competition received from FIDE, the International Chess Federation and the constant support chess continues to get from our usual friends at Crystal Candy Zimbabwe, New World Property Managers/Joina City, Pulse Pharmaceuticals and Minerva, without whom chess would not be where it is today.” Notable players from last year’s competition were Emarald Mushore, the top seed, Vitalis Mapuranga, Roy Mwadzura, Elisha Chimbamu, Muririma Mugove, Cyril Chigodo and Tapiwa Gora. Zimbabwe’s top rated female player Kudzanayi Charinda is likely to be competing with national team compatriots Cristine Makwena, Linda Shaba, Colletah Wakuruwarehwa, Tatenda Zengeni and Refiloe Mudodo. – @innocentskizoe