The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
HIGHLANDERS cut short their Independence Cup celebrations to turn their focus on the potentially explosive Castle Lager Premier Soccer League clash against FC Platinum in Zvishavane on Saturday.  Buoyed by their 1-0 Independence Cup final win against old foes Dynamos, Bosso will be hoping to take their winning form to Mandava Stadium. Highlanders’ historic win over Dynamos ignited a spark among their fans and it’s likely that the Bulawayo giants will have a big roadshow to Zvishavane with their faithful travelling for the encounter. It will not be an easy fixture for 10th placed Highlanders, who have 14 points from 11 outings and are still searching for their first away since 2018. Defending champions FC Platinum, who are fifth with 19 points and four points behind log leaders Dynamos, will fancy their chances of closing the gap with a home victory against Bosso. Highlanders’ coach Mandla Mpofu is aware of the demands of the FC Platinum clash and has challenged his charges to forget about the Independence Cup win and get ready for the crunch league match. “It was good to win against Dynamos, but there’s no time to celebrate because we’ve got a tricky tie against FC Platinum. We have to get ourselves ready for that match and hopefully build from the form that we’re enjoying. “We’ve been playing some good football and our hope is that whatever we do at training during the week will aid us towards posting a positive result in Zvishavane. Our supporters want us to win, we also want positive results, so, we have to keep working hard,” said Mpofu after his team’s Independence Cup victory. Before the Easter weekend Premiership break, Highlanders had survived a home scare and had to fight from 0-2 down to force a 2-2 draw against army side Cranborne Bullets. Tadiwa Chibunyu and Brian Muzondiwa thrust Bullets ahead before Adrian Silla and Lynoth Chikuhwa saved the day for Bosso. Highlanders’ veteran midfielder Rahman Kutsanzira who limped off in the first-half on Monday against Dynamos will be hoping to recover from the ankle knock to face his former paymasters. Another player that Highlanders coach Mpofu is hoping returns to training is winger Ray Lunga, who has been out of action for a month with an ankle injury. Highlanders’ central midfield trio of Nqobizitha Masuku, Silla and Divine Mhindirira will be key in their platinum hunt. FC Platinum coach Norman Mapeza will bank on his youngsters, Thandolwenkosi Ngwenya (19), Hagaziyo Magaya (21), Kelvin Mangiza (20), Panashe Mtimbanyoka (19) and Oscar Bhebhe (19) to combine well with experienced players and collect maximum points against Highlanders. The platinum miners head into the weekend’s game against the backdrop of a 2-0 away win against Bulawayo City. Fixtures
Saturday, April 23: Tenax CS FC v Yadah (Sakubva), Harare City v Black Rhinos (National Sports Stadium), FC Platinum v Highlanders (Mandava), Chicken Inn v Bulawayo City (Luveve), ZPC Kariba v Ngezi Platinum Stars (Nyamhunga) Sunday, April 24: Cranborne Bullets v Herentals (Sakubva), Dynamos v Manica Dynamos (National Sports Stadium), Bulawayo Chiefs v Whawha (Luveve), Triangle United v Caps United (Gibbo)
— @ZililoR