The Chronicle Mbulelo Mpofu, Showbiz Reporter
“AND the award for the most-shocking incident of the night goes to . . . Yes, of course, actor Will Smith,” must have been the words uttered at some point of the event-filled Oscar Awards on Sunday night. “Jada, I love you. G.I. Jane 2, can’t wait to see it, alright?” is how Chris Rock took a jibe at Will Smith’s wife Jada Pinkett Smith’s bald head. In response to the joke, Pinkett Smith, who has been open about her struggle with alopecia, an autoimmune disorder that leads to hair loss was unamused. Rock’s joke referred to 1997 film GI Jane in which Demi Moore played the title role with a severe buzz cut. A lot of theories have been coined around the incident with some sections of the public saying it was a planned public stunt and some saying it was not.  Weighing in on the matter, comedian, Ankela Zex Mdawini who knows how it feels to get beaten for jokes said comedians would not be funny if they were logical and realistic. “Stand-up comedy is a bit childish and crazy. We are funny people. We really wouldn’t be funny if we became logical and realistic. We don’t draw the line and anything goes. The Chris and Will fiasco is part of comedy. “Remember, I was beaten on the bus earlier this year, and the next day, I was back performing on the bus. That incident became part of my CV and it’s a part and parcel of the game,” said Ankela Zex Mdawini. Ntando Van Moyo who established Umahlekisa Comedy Club said Will Smith’s reaction to Chris Rock’s joke was hypocritical. “I think Will should have handled himself better as a former comic himself. His reaction was a bit hypocritical. Had it been someone who didn’t have a comic background, we’d have understood that type of reaction, but from Will, that was utterly hypocritical. “Humour cuts across all topics and is used to address awkward situations with no malice intentions. The Chris issue is synonymous with that of Ankela Zex Mdawini when he got beaten on a bus. It set a bad precedence of censoring humour and limiting the bounds it can and seeks to achieve. “I mean Will used to act in a show that poked fun and body-shamed short people so what’s new here? By the way, it’s the job and responsibility of humourists though to deliver sensitive content in the right tones,” said Moyo. Sunday night’s ugly scene showed the world that sometimes, funny ceases to be funny, with violent consequences ensuing. Meanwhile, Will Smith on Monday issued an apology for striking Rock. “Jokes at my expense are a part of the job, but a joke about Jada’s medical condition was too much for me to bear and I reacted emotionally,” he wrote on his Instagram page. “I would like to publicly apologise to you, Chris. I was out of line and I was wrong. I am embarrassed and my actions were not indicative of the man I want to be. There is no place for violence in a world of love and kindness.” – @eMKlass_49