The Chronicle VAYA Logistics Zimbabwe has unveiled an online platform that seamlessly connects customers with available drivers to complete on-demand deliveries. Using the VAYA e-logistics mobile application, customers can easily organise the transportation or delivery of any item from various drivers and transport owners on the platform at very competitive prices. Mr Givemore Jojo, VAYA Technologies Chief Executive Officer, said the company came up with the current initiative to deploy technology in the routing of deliveries, load pickings and monitor vehicles in order to improve vehicle productivity and distribution efficiency. “We are excited to launch this pioneering service in Zimbabwe. Our e-logistics platform provides innovative solutions to ease Zimbabweans’ last-mile logistics pain points.  The platform allows customers to reduce their transportation costs by receiving competitive bids, while transport providers have an opportunity to increase revenues by selling excess trailer capacity to a nationwide market,” he said. Zimbabwe’s distribution sector has over the years struggled with inefficiencies and bottlenecks, resulting in low-capacity utilisation of vehicles and high freight wastage. Customers have also struggled to get competitive pricing for their cargo due to lack of synergies. Analysis of the logistics domain reveals a lack of service predictability, and an inability to pre-determine demand from freight owners for advance planning of logistics services – all related to the absence of shared planning and execution platform. This leads to excess inventory and increased working capital requirements, for both freight owners and logistics service providers. Mr Jojo noted that such issues, combined with increased pressure for capacity and service performance from logistics companies, compelled VAYA to unveil a platform that brings closer collaboration at a national level, between freight owners, logistics service providers and even trade and industry players around creating supply chain competitiveness. To use the new distribution service, users need to either visit the VAYA Logistics website or download the app, where they can enter a brief item description, date, destination of delivery, size of vehicle they want and the amount they are willing to pay. “It really is that simple. You own a truck and our platform has thousands of registered customers looking for 1 to 30-tonne trucks. Download the VAYA eLogistics Application for Android on <https://tinyurl.com/yc3p8bjm>, or visit <https://vayaafrica.com/vbp/vaya-bidding/welcome> to register today,” said Mr Jojo. Users then evaluate the responses from the truckers before selecting a transporter based on trucker rating, cost and delivery time-frame. However, if all the counter offers are above the amount initially offered, the user can also repost the order with a new amount. When the selected trucker accepts the job, confirmation is sent to the customer. Once connected, customers can track their drivers’ progress via the app and communicate with them on the move. The suitability and choice of drivers is enhanced by a transparent, five-star driver review system, which show users how good the driver is at the point of selecting the trucker. Mr Jojo said customers can either opt for a full capacity delivery option, where they can hire the whole space in a truck, or can select a shared option where their goods are bundled with other customers sharing the same route. The third option involves customers selecting dead mileage return trips for possible discounts. “This platform is already disrupting the country’s delivery sector as it is taking out the complexities of organising deliveries,” said Mr Jojo. “We consulted widely with truck owners, customers and agents and created a delivery service suited to their needs. With the digital led service, we are offering greater flexibility to both consumers and drivers, empowering them to take deliveries into their own hands. Customers can arrange deliveries to suit their lifestyles rather than operating to the traditional delivery slot model.” He added that the platform also empowers anyone with a truck driver’s licence and a truck to earn money as a driver. “We want to showcase to people that they can easily organise independent deliveries of their items or become a delivery driver, without needing to know complex product or logistical information,” said Mr Jojo. VAYA Logistics leverages technology to provide innovative and scalable logistics platforms that aggregate end-to-end operations for individuals, small to medium enterprises and corporates across multiple sectors.