The Chronicle Thandeka Moyo-Ndlovu, Senior Health Reporter THE Covid-19 pandemic has shown how community health workers and volunteers can deliver effective neglected tropical diseases (NTDs) health services, especially to marginalised groups in rural areas, the World Health Organisation has said. Zimbabwe is endemic to 10 NTDs; bilharzia, intestinal worms, elephantiasis, blinding trachoma, rabies, leprosy, sleeping sickness, anthrax, plague and snake envenoming. The first four are the most common NTDs found in the country. Zimbabwe joined the rest of the globe in commemorating World NTD Day yesterday, with calls for more awareness in marginalised communities. The day was set aside by the WHO to bring together civil society advocates, community leaders, global health experts and policymakers working across the diverse NTD landscape. The day affords stakeholders an opportunity to mobilise greater attention, action and investment on priority issues, especially in countries and communities most directly affected by these diseases. In a statement WHO said NTDs can be prevented and controlled through the implementation of multiple public health approaches in affected areas. “Countries must use innovations that have emerged before and during the pandemic to ensure those affected have access to health services they need. The Covid-19 pandemic has shown how community health workers and volunteers can deliver effective neglected tropical diseases health services, especially to marginalised groups,” said WHO. “These workers need support and protection. Members of the public should continue practicing hand hygiene, drinking safe water and eating clean food to prevent contracting many of the neglected tropical diseases.” Community Working Group on health director Mr Itai Rusike said Zimbabwe should work towards the elimination of NTDs by facilitating knowledge sharing and active community participation. “There is a need to carry out health education and community awareness campaigns on NTDs, especially on the common conditions such as bilharzia that is still prevalent among school children. It is caused by waterborne snails carrying parasites that penetrate the skin and can cause distended bellies, malnutrition, and if untreated, can damage women’s reproductive organs, tripling the risk of HIV,” said Mr Rusike. He said the NTD treatment and prevention is highly cost effective and Zimbabwe in the past had done well in rolling out vaccination for these diseases. “The most common NTDs can be mass treated at a cost of less than US$0.50 per person, per treatment. Communities should therefore be cultured and disciplined from family level to practise individual and community health hygiene,” he said. Provisions of the Public Health Act and by-laws on ensuring supply of safe water and proper waste disposal in urban areas should also be enforced, said Mr Rusike. – @thamamoe