The Chronicle Oliver Kazunga, Senior Business Reporter
MINING group, Rio Zimbabwe (RioZim) Limited says the high-grade pit at Murowa Diamond Mine has reached its life span resulting in the operation posting a 43 percent decline in output. Murowa Diamond project, which is situated in Zvishavane is RioZim’s US$450 million mine development programme that the Government has granted national project status. In a statement accompanying financial results for the third quarter ended 30 September 2021, RioZim said: “The group’s associate RZM Murowa (Private) Limited recorded a 43 percent decrease in production compared to third quarter of 2020. “The low diamond production was as a result of processing low-grade ores from the K1 pit after the high-grade K2 pit reached pit life.” Sometime this year, the mining group indicated that works had begun on the US$450 million project that would see the mine switching from open pit to underground mining. The project is also one the many investments Government envisages would feed into the strategic plan of growing the mining sector to a US$12 billion industry by 2023. “The associate’s Crown Jewel Project, which will increase the processing capacity of the plant is progressing albeit at a slower pace than desired due to lack of adequate foreign currency,” said RioZim. Last year, the company produced 568 222 carats, and the mining group intends to increase output to over one million carats by 2025. Government has been pulling all the stops to support new investment in both greenfield and brownfield projects. Alrosa, the world’s biggest diamond producer, is presently on the ground prospecting for gems in the country. Following the signing of a joint venture between the Zimbabwe Consolidated Diamond Company (ZCDC) and Alrosa to develop diamond mines in Malipati, Matabeleland South, exploration was now in full swing. Preliminary works have been completed. In Manicaland, Chinese firm Anjin, which has a workforce of about 500 people, has so far invested US$38 million to resuscitate operations. The miner was targeting production of 900 000 carats this year. — @KazungaOliver