The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Reporter 
BEHIND every successful artist, be it an actor, fine artist, musician, designer, dancer or model, in most cases is a very good team. In the male modelling industry lies such a figure, Ishmael Murangandi who has been facilitating international gigs for male models from the country. He has also been giving up-and-coming male models a platform to showcase their talent through the Mr Teen Zimbabwe pageant that he introduced two years ago. The-Crown-Hunter as Murangandi is affectionately known through his role of national director, has been entering various models at international contests, most that have been taking place virtually due to the Covid-19 restrictions. But what is a national director? A national director works as a model manager for a model that will be representing their country in an international pageant. His duty is to make sure all the requirements are met by the model in order for them to excel. His role is also to play an intermediary role between the model and pageant organisers. Chronicle Showbiz caught up with The-Crown-Hunter to get to know more about him. He said he joined the modelling industry in 2019 after he was groomed by veteran modelling instructor Sarah Mpofu through her Fingers School of Modelling. With his modelling experience, he decided to put himself to the test by participating in the Mr Friendship International 2021 pageant that was held online. He did well as he managed to make top five. Migo de Vera from Philippines came out tops. “Last year I tested my capabilities by registering for Mr Friendship International 2021. I was the only contestant from Africa and I managed to make it to the top five and was placed as a runner up together with Mr Malaysia, Mr Brazil, Mr Panama and Mr Philippines who won the competition,” said The-Crown-Hunter. He said this ignited a zeal for him to pursue the national director role. “I later on applied to be a national director for Mr Globe which was the world’s biggest male pageant for 2021 with 49 contestants from across the world. I coronated Shadel Noble (former Mr Zimbabwe) as our candidate and he was crowned Mr Globe (mister with a cause) 3rd position, Mr Globe Africa and Mr Globe First Runner up 2021. “I also applied to be the national director for Mr Glam International and I selected two models from Zimbabwe (Ben Chest and Panashe Murandu) to represent Zimbabwe and the duo placed top 15 and scooped four special awards,” he said. The-Crown-Hunter was also the national director for Zimbabwe at Man of the Earth competition which saw Saymore Machoni being placed on top 5. “My last event last year was Mr Supraglobal which saw Reginald Muguto being placed on top three as the second runner up,” he said. The-Crown-Hunter said plans for this year are to search for a new team of gentlemen to work with as he wants to keep promoting more and more models from the country. — @mthabisi_mthire