The Chronicle Thandeka Moyo-Ndlovu, Senior Health Reporter
THE school-based vaccination programme targeted at 16 to 17-year-olds is set to continue in Bulawayo as the province races towards achieving herd immunity where at least 400 000 residents are innoculated against Covid-19. When Government announced that vaccines will be available to learners aged 16-17 last year, Bulawayo Covid-19 response team resolved to visit schools to improve the uptake of the vaccine by eligible school going children. The project was funded by the Organisation for Public Health Interventions and Development (OPHID). By the end of school term last year, health teams from the health services department had gone to all the schools around the province. Bulawayo provincial medical director Dr Maphios Siamuchembu said the programme was successful and will continue so that more eligible learners are vaccinated. “We are happy to note that the school-based programme which was funded by OPHID ended on a high note last year but we will continue going into schools to ensure that more learners come on board. We were closely working with the Ministry of Health and Child Care and our teams led by the health services department went into all eligible schools, colleges and polytechnic institutions to ensure we reach out to everyone,” he said. “Now that we are in 2022, we will continue going all out to have the 16–17-year-olds come on board because we need everyone to help us achieve herd immunity. We have done well but we can do better as a province to complement Government efforts to keep us all safe from succumbing to Covid-19.” As of Monday, Zimbabwe had 216 087 confirmed cases, including 185 594 recoveries and 5 047 deaths. To date, a total of 4 136 295 people have received their first dose while 3 147 659 have received the second. An additional 6 508 people have received their third booster jabs. Health experts have warned that the fourth wave which has been triggered by the Omicron variant may result in more new cases and even deaths if people continue being complacent. The country’s Covid-19 coordinator Dr Agnes Mahomva warned that members of the public should get vaccinated to be safe and also continue adhering to the recommended hand hygiene, wearing of masks and practising social distancing. — @thamamoe