The Chronicle Yoliswa Dube-Moyo, Mat South Bureau Chief
Infrastructure development in schools is crucial for the success of the Competence Based Curriculum, an official has said. The Competence Based Curriculum focuses on skills that learners need to exhibit at the end of their education cycle as opposed to merely knowledge accumulated over time. Traditionally, the Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education has been focused on academic performance but the Ministry’s focus is now on ensuring that all schools offer a holistic competence-driven curriculum that equips learners with relevant knowledge as well as both hard and soft skills for self-empowerment, entrepreneurship and further education and training. Speaking at the presentation of the Secretary’s Merit Award to Mtshabezi and Sikhathini High Schools in Matabeleland South province recently, Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education permanent secretary Mrs Tumisang Thabela said the improvement of infrastructure for teaching and learning is a key for effective teaching. “Sound infrastructure is a great enabler of sound learning processes. If we are to produce a learner with a development oriented mindset, they should grow in an environment that is forward looking and continues to develop,” said Mrs Thabela. She said members of staff that are provided with presentable, dignified accommodation usually do not move away from the school and often perform better. “Mtshabezi High School has made significant strides in offering its staff decent and modern accommodation as well as the refurbishment of the dining hall, church hall, the restrooms, computer laboratory, library and the classrooms. A solar system has also been installed to serve the school area and to pump water from the borehole in the event of power outage. I am particularly impressed by the state-of-the-art multi-purpose pavilion with bucket seats which I am informed can accommodate about 800 people,” said Mrs Thabela. At Sikhathini High School, Mrs Thabela commended the school for the provision of a low cost boarding facility. “This not only provides improved access to education but more importantly provides safeguarding to our learners, in particular the girls. Let me also applaud the school for committing its resources to the development of STEM education as witnessed by its rehabilitated science laboratory. “I have also seen massive investment in all attempts to ward-off stray animals by putting up a diamond mesh perimeter fence around the school,” she said. The Secretary’s Merit Award is one of the Ministry’s supervision and motivational strategies that aims to help the ministry achieve its mandate. It is intended to both recognise and affirm best practices at schools that are optimally fulfilling the ministry’s mandate of providing relevant, inclusive and quality education. “The Secretary’s Merit Award reinforces and recognises hard work and achievement and should therefore serve to inspire greater achievement. The 21st century learner should be offered a relevant education product that gives them adaptability/flexibility as a key competence to enable them to thrive in any space that they find themselves in both locally and globally,” said Mrs Thabela. In honour of their hard work, both schools received $1,3 million to assist in the development of a smart classroom whose equipment includes 45 smartphones (tablets) for learners, an electronic board, a projector and an ICT laptop. The school heads, Mr Morgan Moyo of Mtshabezi High School and Mr Dumisani Tsheza of Sikhathini High School both received certificates of excellence for their innovation and tablets. Mrs Thabela also unveiled a plaque in lieu of the Secretary’s Bell of Excellence at both schools. — @Yolisswa.