The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
ASPIRING Highlanders’ vice-chairman Fiso Siziba believes his vast knowledge of the game gained as a player, team manager and administrator makes him the ideal candidate to be second in charge of Bosso. Siziba, a former Black Mambas player and manager, faces radio personality and socialite Babongile Skhonjwa in the February 6 elections in which Bosso members will also choose between Xolani Moyo and Busani Mthombeni for the treasurer’s position. Siziba said his football journey has seen him interacting with key football stakeholders like Zifa, Premier Soccer League and other sporting bodies, which Highlanders stand to benefit from as they are also part of the day-to-day operations of the club. “My experience in football administration, which involves being board member (for) competitions in the Zifa Southern Region, puts me in a relevant and pertinent position as I run for this important position within the Highlanders’ ranks. The Highlanders elections are structured in a manner that there is continuity, so I cannot say I have individual goals that I need to achieve at Highlanders. It is a matter of joining a moving vision, which is prescribed in the recently done strategic plan that was in Victoria Falls,” said Siziba. He said if voted into office, he shall strive to make sure Highlanders return to their yesteryear status of not only being a football biased institution, but a sports club that encompasses other sporting disciplines like netball, basketball volleyball, as well as having an interest in women’s football, a key requisite in terms of Fifa club licensing. “While perhaps Highlanders was getting revenue, some of us were worried when we saw a field which was once used by our ladies’ side Royals being turned into a car park while that of netball was changed to a gazebo. For starters, Highlanders is a sporting institution and when we allow such things, we are going back a thousand miles because our core business is sports. A girl child was disenfranchised as a result of allowing those fields to be turned into beer drinking zones and if members entrust me with their vote, such transgressions will never happen,” said Siziba, who is a Chief Inspector in the Zimbabwe Republic Police. He said coming from an organisation that teaches ethics, professionalism, transparency and honesty, he had gained enough skills to add massive value to Highlanders. “I have sat in meetings with most of the office bearers in the Zifa Assembly. I also enjoy good relations with former players, whose wealth of technical support may be relied upon. I have grown through the ranks in my job and gained the requisite leadership skills,” said Siziba.