The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
THE Highlanders’ electoral committee has cleared four candidates to participate in the elections for a new vice-chairman and treasurer to be held on February 6 at the clubhouse. Fiso Siziba and Babongile Sikhonjwa are contesting for the position of vice-chairman, while Busani Mthombeni and Xolisani Moyo are vying for the treasurer’s portfolio. Peter Dube, the Highlanders electoral court’s returning officer, emerged from the verification process held at the club offices yesterday to officially announce that the four candidates sailed through the vetting procedure after fulfilling the constitutional demands to stand for elections. The candidates were all nominated by at least 10 bona-fide members in regular standing and have had their membership uninterrupted for at least 24 months. The quartet also paid a nomination fee of US$200 which is refundable in the event that the candidate receives at least 10 percent of the total votes cast for the position they are contesting. “Submission of nomination papers closed on Saturday and today we conducted the verification process. I’m happy to announce that all the four candidates, two for the vice-chairman’s position, Babongile Sikhonjwa and Fiso Siziba, as well as Busani Mthombeni and Xolisani Moyo, who are in the race for the treasurer’s position have qualified to stand for the elections. All we can say is, all the best to the candidates,” Dube said. Outgoing vice-chairman Modern Ngwenya and treasurer Donald Ndebele are ineligible to stand, having served two consecutive terms in their positions and step down in line with the Bosso constitution. All four candidates have been busy in the past weeks canvassing for votes from Highlanders’ members. They have also embarked on trips outside Bulawayo to visit chapters in Plumtree, Filabusi, Esigodini, Harare and Gwanda. The candidates have also taken time to engage Bosso members on social media platforms like WhatsApp groups selling their manifestos. – @ZililoR