The Chronicle She left her four children and husband behind for a few months to chase a dream. She wanted to be a singer and she was dedicated to making the goal come true. And her sacrifice paid off big time when she was crowned the winner of Idols South Africa, season 17. Berenike “Berry” Trytsman (31) has officially been signed to Kalawa Jazmee and her album is in production. She is over the moon. “It still feels surreal. When I see myself in newspapers and magazines, I still get a shock. Winning Idols was one of the moments in my life where I now wonder will I ever experience anything this spectacular? It was a defining moment,” Berry says. Born to Opera singers, the Capetonian has always wanted to be a singer and throughout her life, she has been keeping her voice sharp by practising. “I wanted singing to be my life, if I couldn’t sing, I would teach singing,” she says. “I did singing lessons, training with my mum, and tried to make sure I could be as versatile as possible. I wanted to stand out, and after all the years of hard work, entering Idols and winning was finally the right time,” she shares. The competition meant she had to be away from her family and loved ones for four months and it wasn’t easy. “It was a very difficult time; mentally, emotionally, and physically draining. As a family woman, it was harder, I missed birthdays, anniversaries, and by the time I got back home my daughter was already speaking,” she recalls. But for her, it was all worth it and she’s gearing up to establish herself as a singer. “I want to show the versatility that I have, I don’t want to just release the album. I want to release singles too. I don’t want to be just Berry from Idols, I want to establish myself as an artist, create YouTube content too, and be remembered after Idols as well.” Berry believes all mothers, wives can and should chase their dreams. “The one thing we need to remember as women is that we are capable of so much. We mentally tell ourselves when we are married and have kids that that’s what we must focus on, and that’s not true. We are capable of doing anything we want to do, but we need to allow ourselves that freedom to actually do it and make sure the person we are with is accepting of that. “If it’s your goal you need to talk to your husband about it and make sure you are a team and that you are working together so that when you do chase your goals and your dreams, you have the support because without it, it’s extremely difficult, but make yourself proud and make your kids proud by going after your dreams,” she shares. The Ungowami singer will be dropping her album soon. “I am excited, it’s going to be another chance for me to showcase what I am capable of doing. You can never know what to expect from Berry but I am going to make sure that it’s exciting, always different, and always unique,” Berry says. Berry wants her fans to always want to see what’s coming next. “I am sure people are anticipating what is Kalawa Jazmee going to do with Berry because there’s so much that I can do, and I think everyone should be excited to see what’s coming next. It’s going to be amazing.” She plans to be a musician who is as diverse as South Africa. “I love so many genres, and I wouldn’t mind dabbling in Amapiano,” she adds. – Drum