The Chronicle Patrick Chitumba, Midlands Bureau Chief
THE Apex council, the umbrella body representing civil servants has said there won’t be any strike by its members as plans are afoot to negotiate with Government under the National Joint Negotiating Committee (NJNC) next week. Apex council president Mrs Cecelia Alexander, in an interview yesterday, said during the NJNC meeting held in December, parties agreed to meet early January to finalise on a cost-of-living adjustment. “It’s premature for us to call for job action before we exhaust channels of engagement. There won’t be any industrial action taken by our members as plans are already afoot for conditions of service negotiations with the Government under NJNC anytime next week,” she said. Mrs Alexander said the only challenge that might arise is transport fares for civil servants in the wake of an increase in prices of basic commodities since they received their bonuses in United States dollars. Some schools have increased fees without Government approval. Said Mrs Alexander: “The only challenge I see that may arise is that civil servants may not afford to travel to and from work because of the erosion of the value of the current level of wages. Prices of services and goods have continued to skyrocket against stagnant incomes. “School fees have sharply increased hence workers including teachers will not afford to pay such fees. I am quite hopeful that the NJNC will be held as a matter of urgency so that we avoid a serious crisis.” She said they are also expecting a positive response from Government regarding their request to be paid salaries in United States dollars as soon as possible. “In our next meeting which is scheduled for next week, we will implore the employer to seriously consider paying our salaries in United States dollars to hedge the value of our wages. United States dollars will have a positive impact on the real value of our wages and indeed our purchasing power. Rates always go up each time we negotiate for a cost-of-living adjustment,” said Mrs Alexander. She said the Apex council commends Government for the bonuses which were paid in United States dollars. “As workers’ representatives, we believe that the payment of bonuses in United States dollars was very much appreciated and we are thankful to our listening President. We hope that the Government will continue to place importance on the welfare of its employees,” said Mrs Alexander. Zimbabwe Teachers’ Association chief executive officer Dr Sifiso Ndlovu last week said they will continue engaging the Government on their welfare as the New Year begins. He said they are concerned with the rising cost of education. “We are already seeing that goods and services have gone up. So, we will engage the Government on matters of teachers’ welfare as we have done in the past. We also are hoping that the Government would come up with strategies to ensure education becomes accessible to all. What we are seeing at the moment is that education is increasingly becoming expensive, fees are increasing while stationery is also getting expensive,” he said. The Minister for Public Service, Labour and Social Welfare, Professor Paul Mavima called on the Apex council to remain committed to dialogue under the NJNC. “The Government is aware that the worker’s morale has been low because salary gains have been eroded by inflation. We call upon the Apex Council to remain committed to dialogue so that we can continue negotiating to find ways and means to improve the conditions of service,” said Prof Mavima. The Government, he said, will remain committed to improving the welfare of civil servants through salary increments and non-monetary benefits.