The Chronicle Lumbidzani Dima, Chronicle Reporter
POLICE in Entumbane have recovered property that was stolen in various suburbs including Mpopoma, Emabutweni and North End from a 37-year-old man who has since been arrested. The recovery of the goods by the police follows a rise in unlawful entry cases and theft around the city. Recovered properties include four plasma television sets, two black four-plate stoves, a fridge, two gas cylinders, an Acer desktop computer, nine car batteries, a printer, a solar panel, a mixer, a number of cellphones and other goods. The accused, Mr Willium Makoreka from Emabutweni, was arrested on Sunday. Bulawayo provincial police spokesperson, Inspector Abednico Ncube confirmed the arrest. He said police managed to apprehend the suspect through the help of community members leading to the recovery of the stolen goods. “Following an increase in theft of car batteries and unlawful entry into premises, Zimbabwe Republic Police (ZRP) Entumbane had to up their gear and engaged members of the public. This resulted in information being received to the effect that the accused was involved in these criminal activities. A raid was done leading to his arrest, and the property was recovered following his indications,” said Insp Ncube. He said the accused accounted for 15 cases which are being handled by the Criminal Investigation Department (CID). “So far 15 cases have been accounted for by the accused and we are looking forward to recovering more. At the moment only three of the cases have had some complainants identifying their properties,” said Insp Ncube. He commended members of the public for working with the police in supplying information and preventing crimes as witnessed by the recovered goods. The police spokesperson advised those who lost their properties to check with Entumbane Police Station. “I’m appealing to members of the public who might have lost property including the mentioned, to visit ZRP Entumbane to identify their properties and maybe assist in further investigations which will take this case to court and maybe bring peace and harmony to the community of Entumbane and other surrounding areas,” said Insp Ncube.