The Chronicle Yoliswa Dube-Moyo, Mat South Bureau Chief
THE Zanu-PF leadership in Matabeleland South province has urged party members to unite as the ruling party targets a clean sweep in the March 26 by-elections and 2023 harmonised elections. The country will hold by-elections to fill over 133 council and parliamentary seats. Speaking during a Zanu-PF Provincial Co-ordinating Committee meeting in Gwanda on Saturday, newly-elected Zanu-PF Matabeleland South provincial chairman Cde Nqobizitha Mangaliso Ndlovu said the province had its work cut out as elections were just around the corner. “We have a lot of work ahead of us. We have by-elections slated for March 26 and the 2023 harmonised elections around the corner. It’s important as a party, as a province to be united at all times in order for us to win the coming elections. There’s nothing we can achieve divided,” said Cde Ndlovu. The meeting was convened to introduce the new provincial structures and highlight the state of the party in the province since a new executive had been ushered in. “The new provincial structure has been approved by the Politburo. Let us all unite and build Zanu-PF. I hope that as the new executive takes over the province, we’ll be an executive that listens and consults the leadership of the party. We want to be an executive that works with the people and consults the provincial structures. We want to be an executive that is driven to make a difference in the province. We want to be an executive that will unite the party and bring new people into the party. The success of this executive will be measured by the number of new people that will join Zanu-PF,” said Cde Ndlovu. “I want us to see ourselves as a united province and geared towards a resounding victory for our President in 2023. Those who are aware of the 2018 election results will know that our victory was not resounding. We have a lot of work to do to address that.” Cde Ndlovu urged party members to prioritise developmental projects being spearheaded by Government. “I’m happy that among the executives, we have council chairpersons. They have a mandate to ensure that every devolution project is known by the people. As Members of Parliament, projects done under the Constituency Development Fund should be known by the people that they’re spearheaded by President Mnangagwa. We should be a province that knows in each and every constituency and ward what the Government is doing to empower the masses. We have a hardworking President, but we’re letting him down by not highlighting his work to the people,” said Cde Ndlovu. Politburo member Cde Richard Ndlovu urged party members to be builders that are united towards the same goal. “We’re a rainbow province comprising many different tribes. There’s no person who is more important than the other. The 2023 harmonised elections are just around the corner and winning is about numbers,” said Cde Ndlovu. He said the new executive needs the support of party members and warned against elements that want to infiltrate the party. “Let us search our souls and determine whether or not we’re being sincere to the party. Let us work towards strengthening the province and the party,” said Cde Ndlovu. He expressed concern over youths that have reached the age of 18, but do not have proper documentation to enable them to register to vote, saying urgent action was needed to address this anomaly. — @Yolisswa