The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
The late former Highlanders president Ndumiso Gumede will be laid to rest at his rural home in Inyathi, Bubi District, Matabeleland North on Tuesday, the family has confirmed. It has always been his wish to be buried next to his parents, father Sithelo Gumede and mum Elina Msimanga. Gumede died on Wednesday afternoon at Mpilo Hospital after a short illness. He was 76. His body will leave Bulawayo for good on Monday for his Inyathi home where it will lie in state ahead of burial on Tuesday. Before departure there will be a memorial service on the same day Monday that will be held at the Amphitheatre although Highlanders had requested the council to allow them to use Barbourfields Stadium, a request which the council turned down on the grounds that it didn’t want to have the turf at the stadium destroyed. “Burial is on Tuesday in Inyathi, we are still waiting for a way forward from the Government. The documents which they requested have been submitted to them, for now everything is going smoothly with the service set for Monday. We had hoped to get Barbourfields Stadium but if that fails we will use Amphitheatre for people to bid umuntu wabo farewell, we will then just go via Barbourfields Stadium,” said Gumede’s younger sister Cephekhulu Fuyane. The family was last night expecting Gumede’s overseas-based sister, Thembekile Mhlophe while his two sons Mondliwethu Robin Gumede and Cabangani Dwight Gumede are expected to arrive today. Gumede’s only daughter Thembelihle Terrilyn Zulu is already home. Meanwhile, acting Bulawayo town clerk, Kempton Ndimande says the council decided against allowing the Gumede family to use Barbourfields Stadium for the memorial service so as to avoid future challenges. “If it was our way we certainly would not hesitated, Gumede was and is a giant in the society and remember the City awarded him a Civic honour but we must also remain alert to the fact that Caf banned Barbourfields Stadium for among other things its poor state of the turf so having thousands of people on that turf would pull us far back and as a City might remain without any international football for a very long time. Our position as Council, after the Caf ban, has been that Barbourfields Stadium should only be used for football matches and nothing else.,” said Ndimande.