The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
THE Bulawayo Basketball League (BBL) will resume this weekend following a month-long festive season break. Some teams started preparations for the second-half of the season soon after the Christmas holiday and BBA secretary-general Francis Dube said fans should brace themselves for more competitive and exciting matches. “We are resuming our league season on Friday. We have been preparing for the return and I can safely say we are ready to go. This past weekend we held a refresher symposium for referees and club coaches as part of our preparations for resumption of the league. “The second part of the season is going to be more interesting, with competition intensifying as the season progresses. There’ll soon be provincial competitions and we hope all our teams will be ready,” said Dube. Action will start on Friday with Nust taking on City Knights, while Highlanders will face-off with Mavericks. Saturday will see the Lakers and Giants squaring off in the match of the day. Mavericks top the senior men’s table with 12 points from six matches, while Giants sit a point behind from the same number of games. In the ladies’ league, Lakers Seniors lead with 10 points from five games followed by Lakers Glen Lodge Mavericks, who are a point behind from six matches. Mavericks’ ladies are third with six points from three games. Basketball fans can now follow action in the BBL online via the NB23 Swish App. The app allows fans to follow live scores, line-ups, statistics as well as player profiles. Meanwhile, the Basketball Union of Zimbabwe (BUZ) is preparing for its elective congress at Mtshabezi High School in Matabeleland South province. The posts of treasurer-general and commercial commission have since been filled by Brighton Ncube and Simba Munamba, who are unopposed. Pendrick Ndlovu, Nash Majoni and Ignatius Yesaya will fight it out to lead the 3X3 Commission, with Charmaine Chamboko battling it out with Sunny Mbofana and Sikhumbuzo Ndlovu for the secretary-general post. Incumbent president Joe Mujuru will face David Pick and Allen Mavunga for the top post. BBL Fixtures Friday
NUST vs City Knights, Mavericks vs Highlanders (A) Saturday
Mavericks B vs Lakers Supermed (B), Highlanders B vs City Royals (B), NUST vs City Royals (W), Highlanders vs Angels (W), Legends vs Clippers (A), Lakers A vs Mavericks (W), Lakers vs Giants (A)
– @innocentskizoe