The Chronicle Then God blessed them, and God said to them, “Be fruitful and multiply; fill the earth and subdue it; have dominion over the fish of the sea, over the birds of the air, and over every living thing that moves on the earth.” Genesis 1: 28 A VERY close friend of mine has been working on a project for over three years. I have watched them work hard, come close to giving up, go back to the drawing board again and again, I’ve observed them being positive and full of faith and at times losing hope and almost throwing in the towel in their efforts to refine their idea for it to be good enough to get the funding they needed. Yesterday they sent me a text telling me it had finally been approved and they had been offered the full capital to kick-start it. The text was a mixed message of excitement and on the other hand, fear. They could not believe their dreams were finally going to come true but they also expressed how scared they were at the magnitude of it all, “What if it’s too big for me? Am I ready? Can I really handle a business that big? Maybe I should do it on a smaller scale,” they said. As I congratulated and encouraged my friend, I thought about how often we feel as if our dreams are too big, when the opportunity arises to make them a reality sometimes we shrink back and start questioning whether we can be or do something that big, whether we are capable of handling it or if it’s even meant for us. So many of us are living unfulfilled lives because we don’t realise how amazing we really are. Most people are stuck in being part of the status quo while suppressing their real hopes and dreams. We are guilty of playing it safe, somehow fitting in brings a sense of security and acceptance. But what if we stopped living passively and started walking in dominion? What if we stepped out there, took charge, and started living the way our Maker intended for us to live? How would your life be different if you really believed without doubt that you were born to be great, to be extraordinary, to break boundaries, to lead, and then you cast away all fear and stepped out and attempted to achieve the impossible? Be blessed.