The Chronicle Sikhulekelani Moyo, Business Reporter
THE Grain Marketing Board (GMB) is hunting for a new chief executive officer to replace Mr Rockie Mutenha who retires on April 30, 2022. He is retiring from his post after the expiry of his five-year contract and GMB has said this was in compliance with its retirement policy. In a statement, Zimbabwe’s grain utility, which is head-hunting the incumbent chief executive officer through an employment agency, said among other duties the GMB boss would be responsible for ensuring national food security. “The mandate of the CEO is to ensure the national food security and this requires a strategist with outstanding leadership qualities able to translate expectations onto effective programmes.The incumbent will work closely with the board of directors and leadership team reporting to the position,” it said. GMB said the CEO will also undertake programmes and initiatives designed to support the management of the Strategic Grain Reserve and make the parastatal a viable entity. The principle accountability of the CEO as stated by the entity include; leading and providing research ideas in the formulation of policies, strategies and plans. Furthermore, the incumbent should ensure food security through effective mobilisation, storage and distribution of all controlled products and overseeing all GMB operations and business activities to ensure production of the desired results that are consistent with the commercialisation of the parastatal. This will go a long way in ensuring GMB realises self-sustainability among others. Meanwhile, over one million tonnes of grain have been delivered to GMB following a bumper harvest the country attained in the last cropping season on the back of the good rainfall season received last year. Again this year, the country anticipates another bumper harvest on account of projects by weather and climate experts that Zimbabwe would receive normal to above normal rainfall this summer cropping season. Lands, Agriculture, Water, Fisheries and Rural Development Minister Dr Anxious Masuka last Friday said the Government will start conducting the national crop assessment in two weeks after farmers have finished planting. Due to delayed rains, the summer cropping season commenced late. — @SikhulekelaniM1.