The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Reporter
Yesteryear great, rhumba musician Themba “Boyoyo” Mathe has scheduled a walk whose goal is to spread the message of peace, unity and love across societies. The walk that has been scheduled for February 26 is set to start at the Bulawayo Tower Block to Natisa area (Matobo). The walk is set to start at 6am and end at midday where there will be the unveiling of a detour (Istiki) at Natisa area on a mountain just near Boyoyo’s homestead. The Istiki will be a white painting on the rocks that will resemble a word of peace, unity and love. It is expected to remain vivid to the people of Matobo even long after Boyoyo is no more. The campaign walk comes as a result of the forthcoming harmonised elections next year. For Boyoyo, he feels that as an artiste, he has a role to play in uniting people across their political affiliation. A lover of enhancing peace, Boyoyo who at one point fingered Mokis Connection band owner Morgan Ncube for having a hand in him going blind, has moved on and is still shining like back in the days where he was a regular on national music shows such as galas. The artiste who is part of those who popularised Kalanga music, through his manager Davison Dube, said artistes have a role to play in uniting societies. “I found it necessary to send a strong message to fellow Zimbabweans as we’re approaching an election period. This is why I decided to organise a campaign walk of 10 kilometres as a way of sending a message of love, peace and unity for a better developed Zimbabwe,” he said. Turning to the music side, Boyoyo who despite health challenges, still has studio mojo, said it is high time promoters, artistes and the corporate world work together to develop the music industry. “Musicians still suffer because of lack of support and collaboration thus the need for promoters, artistes and the corporate world to come together and change the face of the creative sector. Shows should be fully supported, studios developed and airplay granted to each and every talented artiste, who also should be able to give their audience value for their money and time.” Boyoyo has achieved success over the past years through his hit songs that include Ibhara Ngamazinyo, Ndazi Ndazi, Irene, Wafa Wafa mthakathi and Basi Boy which once topped national radio charts. Last year, Boyoyo and his Mthimbani Sound Blasters band launched their 10th album: As Long Sisaphefumula that features Ngqwaa Lo Bhururu. – @mthabisi_mthire.