The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Reporter
THERE is a youngster in town who is out to fight with all he has in order to claim a crown that many from the Amapiano and dance genres are scrambling for. Majoer Prodi (real name Pride Mhlanga), a talented performing artist who is the holder of the 2021 ZimStars Awards Best House/Dance Artist outshone stars such as DJ Zandimaz, Mzoe 7 and Djembe Monks to clinch this award showing the talent he possesses. In an interview, Majoer Prodi, who proved his worth at the inaugural Miss Environment Zimbabwe pageant and 9ice Festival held last year by delivering top-drawer acts, said there is no time to stop as he is working on his second album. “I’ll be releasing my second album titled Wena Wensundu. It’ll have five regional and international collaborations with artistes, Jessy Cullmann from Germany, Bella Layne from DRC, Juma from Malawi, D Ukingo from Tanzania and Nelly from South Africa. “From the upcoming album, I released a song, Umntakabani in December on a German radio station named Radio R FM,” said Majoer Prodi who is behind the Senzangakhona hit.
He said the 17-track album is diversified and is one not to miss. “Some of the tracks on Wena Wensundu are intro – Kuwe Ntuthu, Amathamsanga, Drip Ensundu, Senzangakhona featuring Daak Roight, Ngiyagula, Ma Sports featuring Philo Cliff and Mbali, Top 7 featuring Jessy Cullmann, Hinde Monie featuring Bella Leyna and Vibrations featuring Lance Hebron.” Majoer Prodi is touted as the alter ego of multi-hyphenated New Age Afrocentric entertainment with one EP under his belt. Last year he featured as a dancer on Winky D’s Love Shouldn’t Hurt music video that was shot by Afri Arts and Simdoc in Bulawayo. The artiste has performed at the Intwasa Fashion Show Guest and the Bulawayo Shutdown gig where he performed alongside award-winning Novuyo Seagirl, Nasty C, Mafikizolo, Killer Kau, Shasha, Nadia Nakai, De Mthuda. He was once a StarBrite Zim Finalist in 2018, Dreamstar Semi-finalist in 2018 and made the Stumbo Amapiano Top 20 last year. — @mthabisi_mthire