The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Reporter
FOR many Bulawayo artistes, it’s a dream come true to meet internationally recognised artistes and this was the case for fast-rising Umthobanhliziyo tribal (fusion of Hiphop, Maskandi and Afro pop) muso Fab G Umshana KaGogo. The artiste was the only Bulawayo musician to share the stage with South Africa’s man of the moment Big Zulu during a show held last Monday. Taking to the stage with three songs I Drip YoBizo, Salibonani and his latest hit Thatha Mi, Fab G Umshana KaGogo’s energy was contagious to the whole crowd who danced to his songs. Speaking to Chronicle Showbiz at the gig that lit up Bulawayo, Fab G Umshana KaGogo said he had a chat with Big Zulu after the show and they both complemented each other’s sets. “After performing, I was privileged to be the last act before Big Zulu and I met him after his set of which I commented on how I was inspired by his work. “He also showered praises on me about how my brand looks, how I dress and represent the culture laced up with a modern feel,” said Fab G Umshana KaGogo. Fab G Umshana KaGogo said the love for culture that Big Zulu always preaches about inspires his art. “Big Zulu’s sound is cultural as he is tightening black culture through his sound just like I do. He is a storyteller just like I am so we have a lot in common. “Looking at him at his age, yet I’m younger but doing almost a sound that is familiar to him, I feel I’m in the right lane and there is a bright future ahead if I keep learning and creating,” he said. “Big Zulu’s stage presence is powerful due to the fact that he is not all about himself and bragging but he does it for the people. He connects with the audience in a way that they relate easily to his sound, not just dancing to the beat but also being healed and touched by his message. “To me ngumuntu wabantu and from a few minutes I spoke with him, I understood how humble he is. I was surprised when I heard him comment about the way I dressed by mixing the traditional and modern feel which proves that he was paying attention though the day was about him but he still had the heart to recognise and appreciate my work,” said Fab G Umshana KaGogo. Commenting on his performance, Fab G Umshana KaGogo said at first, he was nervous but tried to give it his all. “I was a bit nervous at first because it was my first-time being part of an event with guys like Roki, Jah Signal and Big Zulu but the support I got and the faith I had in art boosted my confidence. “I was thrilled when I sat side by side with Big Zulu having a chat with him. I could finally realise and accept how far I have come and how much my hard work is being recognised as Big Zulu even said kuyathembisa,”  he said. Fab G Umshana KaGogo said he is hopeful that they will talk about a collaboration in the future. — @mthabisi_mthire