The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sport Reporter
BASKETBALL Union of Zimbabwe (Buz) president Joe Mujuru has dismissed accusations that the association has deviously made amendments to its constitution ahead of the Elective Congress set for January 29 at Mtshabezi High School. Buz is accused of making alterations to the constitution in order to boost some of the candidates’ chances of retaining their posts. The elections will see the incumbent Joe Mujuru from Bulawayo Basketball Association, battling it out with Allen Mavhunga and Harare Basketball Association president David Pick for the highest post in local basketball. “People are not informed. No clause has been added ahead of the election. What actually happened is that we had a strategic meeting and the extraordinary congress in Gweru December 18 where we reviewed the constitution. “All the resolutions are going to be either rejected or adopted at the elective congress meaning there has been no change to the constitution. The playing field is level ahead of the elections,” said Mujuru. According to the Buz notice of the Elective Congress, there will also be elections for Treasurer General, president of the Commercial Commission and president of the 3×3 Commission. In the same notice, Buz also reminded the assembly of their obligations to pay their annual membership fee or risk not being allowed to participate in the Congress and the competitions or events organised by Buz. According to the notice, the Congress shall consist of a maximum of two delegates from each affiliated provincial association with the right to one vote. Voting rights shall be granted to the first delegate if both are present. The two delegates must present a document signed by the president of their provincial association proving that they are delegates of that association. The extraordinary congress will among other issues seek to resolve the Charmaine Chamboko debacle which has rocked the association in the last weeks. According to the Harare and Bulawayo Basketball Associations, the Buz executive committee had contravened its constitution by allowing Chamboko to remain in office after her election into the Zimbabwe Olympic Committee Board as chairperson for media, communications, public relations and diplomacy in April this year. -@innocentskizoe