The Chronicle Business Reporter 
ZIMBABWE Revenue Authority (Zimra) Acting Commissioner General, Mr Rameck Masaire, is leaving the tax collector on early retirement with effect from next month. In a statement yesterday, Zimra vice board chair Mrs Josephine Matambo said Dr Morris Mpofu will be the Acting Commissioner General effective January 1 to April this year. Mr Masaire has been acting Commissioner General since February last year having re-joined the authority in September 2018.
Mr Masaire was appointed Acting Commissioner General replacing Ms Faith Mazani who resigned in January last year to take up a new post with the International Monetary Fund. “Zimra board announces the early retirement of Mr Rameck Masaire who was the Acting Commissioner General of Zimra. The retirement is with effect from 1 February 2022,” said Mrs Matambo. “Mr Masaire re-joined Zimra as commissioner for domestic taxes on 1 September 2018, coming from Ernst & Young.
“He served in that role until 1 February 2021 when he was appointed ACG of Zimra, the role he has been executing until his retirement notice on 30 December 2021.” She said with his vast tax knowledge and experience, Mr Masaire has provided valuable leadership to the organisation and the team that he has been working with over the years. Mrs Matambo said a number of notable achievements have been recorded during his time in Zimra, which will remain as invaluable legacy for the organisation and the nation at large. “The board takes this opportunity to thank Mr Masaire for his contribution to the organisation and wish him well in his future endeavours. “In the same breath, on behalf of the board, I announce the appointment of board member, Dr Morris Mpofu as Acting Commissioner General with effect from 1 January 2022 until 30 April 2022 with the hope that within that period the recruitment process for the substantive Commissioner General would have been finalised,” she said. Dr Mpofu’s appointment, Mrs Matambo said, was in terms of section 17 (4) (b) of the Public Entities Corporate Governance Act [Chapter 10:31]. “The Zimra board wishes Dr Mpofu the best in managing this transition,” she said.