The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Chronicle Reporter
FOUR Zanu-PF Youth League officials have been awarded for coming out second and third on clarity on China-Africa co-operation out of 100 participants from 40 African States during the Fifth China Africa Young Leaders Forum. The wing’s Secretary for External Relations Cde Sibongile Sibanda and Secretary for Economic Affairs Cde Shingirirayi Mangwana received the awards given for clarity of thought and appreciation of China-Africa co-operation and future perspective. Cde Kelvin Manyengawana who is secretary for Businesses Development and Liaison and Cde Lancelot Taga who is Youth League member were awarded the Excellent Prize for their thesis by the International Committee of the Communist Party of China (IDCPC). Topics that were of focus include achievements of Communist Party of China (CPC’s) centenary, experience of African countries in exploring development paths suitable to their national conditions, traditional friendship and mutually beneficial and win-win co-operation between China and Africa, expectations of young Africans for China-Africa co-operation and responsibilities of young Africans against the backdrop of changes not seen in a century. The virtual seminar was held under the theme “Deepen Exchange of Governance Experience and Open Up New Era of China-Africa Co-operation” and saw a participant from Nigeria coming first in the competition. In an interview Cde Sibanda thanked the ruling party and President Mnangagwa for availing opportunities for engagements. “I am very humbled by the awards that me and colleagues got and we would like to thank the party and President Mnangagwa for giving us an opportunity to participate in such forums. “It shows that the party is walking the talk in grooming young people in preparing us to be future leaders by giving us opportunities,” said Cde Sibanda. She also thanked the leaders of the Republic of China saying such forums should deepen ties between the two countries. “I would like to say that as we engage in such forums we have skills transferred and also come and implement what we would have learnt in such forums so that we impart our knowledge to people back home,” said Cde Sibanda. Cde Manyengawana said the recognition shows the development of the country’s education sector. “I would like to thank the First Secretary President Mnangagwa for trusting the youth league to represent the country at the international forum as the deployment has led to the recognition. “This is a worthy recognition that goes to all the youths that we are capable youths because of investment in education by the Government,” he said. Cde Taga said:
“I am very pleased to have won this award. I thank my senior leadership in the Zanu-PF Youth League for giving us this opportunity to participate in the China-Africa Relations through the International Liaison Department of the Chinese Communist Party. “These platforms enhance our knowledge and skills development as youths in line with the Vision 2030 agenda. I want to thank the Communist Party of China leadership and Zanu-PF under the visionary leadership of His Excellency the President of the Republic of Zimbabwe and Zanu-PF First Secretary Cde ED Mnangagwa for grooming us and promoting South to South relations enhancing the long lasting friendship between China and Zimbabwe,indeed an upper middle income economy is guaranteed by the year 2030,” said Cde Taga. Cde Mangwana thanked President Mnangagwa for giving them an opportunity to showcase their talents. “The First Secretary gave us an opportunity to participate on this forum which is testament to his belief and faith that he has in young people to take control of the economic revolution currently underway,” he said. “We are happy that President Mnangagwa and President Xi Jinping continue to strengthen cooperation between the Party and country for the betterment of ordinary Zimbabweans. “We remain responsible as Zimbabweans to build our own country, as the President says ‘nyika inovakwa nevene vayo,’” said Cde Mangwana. — @mthabisi_mthire