The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
BASKETBALL Union of Zimbabwe (Buz) president Joe Mujuru has called for calm ahead of the elective general congress at Mtshabezi High School in Matabeleland South tomorrow. Build-up to the elective congress turned into a fierce mudslinging contest, with some candidates trash talking their opponents. Allegations of voter manipulation have also been levelled against the present executive. Mujuru, who is seeking re-election, said time for canvassing for votes is now over and all focus should now be on building the sport, starting right at the congress. He said unity is integral in charting a progressive path for the game. “It’s been a few months filled with contestations, people talking, people campaigning, and to us it’s evidence that our structures are involved in the game. We are excited because we know all the provinces have been involved in this process. At this point we should all make sure that Basketball is the winner. Everything has been done above board as the nomination process and vetting were all not contested,” said Mujuru. “I believe all other talk was about campaigning talk. It was just a candidate either trying to get into office or trying to stay in office. I think by now, every province knows who they are voting for, so we need to be calm and build basketball. Let’s build by having international tournaments; let’s have basketball being played at grassroots level and all our provincial leagues running at the highest level of professionalism. Let’s transfer the campaign energy into work on the ground,” he said. The Buz congress will consist of a maximum of two delegates per affiliated provincial association, with only one vote. The voting right will be granted to the first delegate if both are present. The two delegates must present a document signed by the president of their provincial association proving that they represent that association. Buz election nominations Commercial Commission: Simba Munamba Athletes Commission: Theo Weale, Johnson Shumba, Taurai Chitsinde Competitions Commission: Mthulisi Makhosana, Gideon Chikopa, Ndumiso Mabhena 3×3 Commission: Pendrick Ndlovu, Nash Majoni, Ignatius Yesaya Technical Commission: Brighton Navaya, Tonderai Shasha Women & Youth Commission: Tracey Phiri, Jacqueline Chironga Treasurer-General: Brighton Ncube Secretary-General: Sikhumbuzo Ndlovu, Sani Mbofana, Charmain: Yemurai Chamboko President: David Pick, Allen Mavhunga, Joe Mujuru