The Chronicle Patrick Chitumba, Midlands Bureau Chief
CROPS and livestock in the Midlands province are doing well and there are prospects of a bumper harvest if weather conditions remain favourable. In an interview yesterday, Midlands Agritex Provincial Crop and Livestock Officer Mrs Medlinah Magwenzi said livestock in the province is doing well because of an abundance of pastures and water. She said 258 842 hectares out of the target of 285 000 ha have been put under maize representing a success rate of 91 percent. Mrs Magwenzi said sorghum has been planted on 22 053 ha against a target of 30 000ha giving a 74 percent success rate. “The crop and livestock situation in the Midlands province is doing well with prospects of a bumper harvest if weather conditions remain favourable. Under pearl millet, we have planted 3242 ha against a target of 4000, finger millet 2015 ha against target of 2500, groundnuts, 41 116 ha against a target of 50 000, soyabeans 701 ha against a target of 1000 ha, sunflower, 1327 ha against target of 5 000, cotton 73 237 ha against target of 100 000 among other crops,” she said. Mrs Magwenzi said the early planted maize crop was planted in November under CBZ Agro yield programme. She said maize is still being planted under Pfumvudza/Intwasa programme. “Incessant rains especially in Gweru and Zvishavane have resulted in leaching especially for the maize crop planted in December. Chlorosis is evident especially on sandy soils,” she said. Mrs Magwenzi said sorghum which was planted in December is at late vegetative stage. “The majority of the crop is in good condition. Pearl millet planted in December is at late vegetative stage-the majority of the crop is in good condition as well as finger millet which is at late vegetative stage and the majority of the crop is in good condition. Groundnuts planted in December are in good condition and so are soyabeans,” she said. Mrs Magwenzi said tobacco planted in November under irrigation is at late vegetative stage. “Most of the cotton crop is at early vegetative stage and is in good condition. Planting is in progress. Bambara nuts and cowpeas are also in good condition,” said Mrs Magwenzi. She encouraged farmers to complete production and productivity forms by February 15. There is high weed pressure across the province due to incessant rains and farmers are advised to use herbicides to save the crop and to attain good specified yields. Farmers with plots but have not yet received maize seed are urged to put sorghum seed due to season length. Sorghum seed is at GMB depots in their respective districts. There is a need to continue planting sunflower. Please farmers check with your Agricultural Extension Officers in your respective areas,” said Mrs Magwenzi. She urged farmers across the province to plant sweet potato vines as much as possible to capitalise on the season. Under horticulture, the crops are in good condition but tomatoes and butternut have been affected by incessant rains.  She said the crops would recover soon.