The Chronicle I knew something really special was happening when I saw a picture of Nigerian superstar Davido and three other guys dressed in the same fabric. They looked better than amazing in green African print material accessorised with expensive looking metals. It must have been a wedding, I thought. I was right about that bit. Zimbabwean fashion designer and entrepreneur Daniella Allen and Nigerian business mogul Igho Ubiribo were getting traditionally married. Pictures of their wedding went viral on social media and I hear Harare came to a standstill as the Nigerians showed off who the big boys were. It was nothing short of opulent; the kind that everybody would like to be a part of. My instinct had also told me that Davido and company were probably part of the bridal party because of the fact that they were dressed in the same fabric, but I was wrong about that bit. The wedding guests had been asked to wear the same fabric, in different designs of course. I have been seeing this a lot, especially with weddings in South Africa and Botswana and I think it’s pretty cool. It’s no different from asking people to wear all white, black on black or 50 shades of blue. It’s actually quite genius if you ask me. Including a dress code for your guests is a great way to enhance the tone, theme or mood you want for your wedding or event. Not only can it help streamline the look you’re going for by having your guests dress according to your overall event style, but it also gives your guests peace of mind by knowing what they should wear. No one likes to appear at any event under or overdressed. Some people, like me, would want to make the right impression and look the best they can, as a sign of respect to the host. When hosting an event, be it a wedding, birthday party or anything really — so much effort goes into the planning and making sure everything goes right. You want the ambience to be perfect, you want the vibe to be correct and when all has been said and done, you want perfect looking pictures and videos at the end of the day. Well, at least I do. And one of the ways of attaining this perfection is when your guests follow through with the dress code. As the host, two of the most important factors to consider when setting a dress code are the season and the venue. If it’s a wedding and the couple is getting married outside in the afternoon, the dress code can be more relaxed. Let the venue and season dictate the dress code for the wedding party as well as the guests. Naturally, you should also consider the location, climate and the level of formality you want for your event otherwise you run the risk of a very wide variety of tuxedos, chinos and the odd pair of jeans. While dress codes can provide guidance for each style, the definition of different dress codes has changed over time. A lot more people are much more relaxed when it comes to dress codes, which is why we’re seeing more “casual” formal wear options. Like I mentioned earlier, following the dress code is a sign of respect for the host and the event. I know opinions will vary on this but generally, when you’re getting dressed up for a wedding, your attire should always be respectful, conservative, and appropriate. Keep in mind that the rules of etiquette were designed to help one feel more at ease and comfortable in all social situations. The standard rules of being well-dressed for a wedding still apply, so just like a restaurant or private club, the wearing of ripped jeans, baseball hats, and non-collared shirts is not appropriate, unless it’s at the request of the couple that you dress down. I have been to weddings where I have seen all sorts of things and wondered how anyone would leave the house looking like that! Avoid wearing anything too short or revealing, and don’t look unkempt or wrinkled. If you have to fight with your outfit to keep parts of your body covered, you would rather not show up at all.