The Chronicle Oliver Kazunga, Senior Business Reporter
A SOUTH Africa-based Zimbabwean horticulture and rabbit farmer intends to establish a thriving rabbitry venture in the country following a recent surge in demand for rabbit meat in the country. Zimbabwe’s cuniculture sector which almost faced extinction in recent years, is undergoing massive transformation following the formation of the Zimbabwe Commercial Rabbit Breeders Association (Zicorba) in 2020. In line with the Government’s Livestock Growth Plan, Zicorba has recently been on an offensive embarking on initiatives such as capacity building programmes, investing in the Zimbabwe’s first export-certified rabbit abattoir as well as forming strategic alliances with other cuniculture farmers and association across Africa. In its recent newsletter, Zicorba quoted Mrs Innes Ncube, who is based in South Africa, saying she was using her expertise to set up a thriving rabbitry enterprise in the country. “South Africa-based horticulture and rabbit farmer, Mrs Innes Ncube plans on using her experience to set up a thriving rabbitry in Zimbabwe on the back of the recent surge in demand for rabbit meat in the country. “The Krugersdorp farmer said the Zimbabwean market was showing so much potential, hence her desire to invest in a second rabbitry in her home country,” said the rabbit breeders association. Zicorba estimates that between 2,5 tonnes and 3,5 tonnes of rabbit meat is being consumed on the local market per month at present and the figure is expected to rise to about 15 tonnes by the end of this year. Mrs Ncube was quoted as saying: “My husband and I have a farm here in South Africa. We started rabbit farming in 2020 with the vision of being one of the top suppliers of rabbit meat and the business has been very good. “In 2021, we started a rabbitry back home in Zimbabwe since there is a growing market for rabbit meat. “I want to create a niche market for rabbit meat and establish myself as one of the biggest producers in the Matabeleland region. “I intend on using only pure-breds so that I maximise on their food conversion ratio and ensure that my productivity levels are high.” She will soon be transferring some of her breeding stock from South Africa to Zimbabwe to boost operations at her farm. “In South Africa, we have 50 does and 10 bucks as our breeding stock. It is from this pool where we also aim to complement our Zimbabwean project. We hope to grow it to this same level or even bigger, whilst maintaining best international practices,” said Mrs Ncube. She said the advent of Zicorba had catalysed the process of the uptake of commercial rabbit farming in Zimbabwe and this had helped her in making the decision to set up a rabbitry in the country. “I am grateful to the work being done by Zicorba as this has put commercial rabbit farming on the spotlight. There should be more trainings and more awareness campaigns on rabbit farming,” said Mrs Ncube. Meanwhile, Zicorba Bulawayo Chapter anticipates that Matabeleland region was set to become the epicentre of rabbit production in Zimbabwe as the association was working on transforming backyard cuniculture into commercial ventures. — @KazungaOliver.