The Chronicle Thandeka Moyo-Ndlovu, Senior Health Reporter
BULAWAYO City Council is set to recruit 50 general nurses to improve service delivery in its 19 clinics, which have been affected by a mass exodus of health workers since 2020. Council requires a staff complement of 186 nursing staff to operate at full capacity, but of late the city has been operating with staffing levels of between 49 and 61 percent. In a notice yesterday, Bulawayo Town Clerk Mr Christopher Dube said the local authority was seeking the services of 50 qualified nurses to join the health services department. Potential candidates must be registered with the Nurses Council of Zimbabwe with a valid practising certificate and at least two years’ experience as a qualified nurse. “The City of Bulawayo offers an attractive package comprising a competitive salary plus a number of fringe benefits, details of which will be revealed to the shortlisted applicants. Applications in envelopes clearly marked “Registered General Nurse” should be sent along with a comprehensive Curriculum Vitae and copies of relevant academic/professional certificates supported by three professional traceable referees,” said Mr Dube. “Applications are to be posted to the acting human capital director or dropped at City of Bulawayo Ground Floor, PO Box 558 Municipal Buildings (Tower Block) Bulawayo L Takawira Mugabe 8 R G Mugabe Bulawayo not later than Monday, 7 February 2022.” Authorities are now fearing for the worst saying if brain drain is not addressed, it will affect access to health services. The latest development come as the local authority is battling service delivery challenges due to a sharp decline in revenue inflows. Councillors have previously highlighted that service delivery was now being compromised by the shortage of nurses which forced residents to spend long hours in clinics. The Deputy Mayor Councillor Mlandu Ncube recently expressed concern about the situation at council clinics. “The situation was no longer at council level but at national level. Central Government nurses were also leaving the country; only a few wanted to join local authorities. Zimbabwe’s nursing staff training standards were very high and most of the Commonwealth countries recruited Zimbabwean trained nursing staff. Residents should pay their bills on time so that the welfare and remuneration of council staff is improved,” he said. The country’s health sector has over the past few years been hit by staff exodus including the movement of nurses, doctors, pharmacists among others to other countries. Since January last year UBH has lost 161 nurses, 14 doctors, four pharmacists and 10 laboratory technicians and scientists. At Mpilo Central Hospital, 133 nurses and 15 doctors left the institution while 15 other health staff also resigned during the course of the year.@thamamoe