The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Reporter
SONGSTRESS Lee McHoney (born Linda Nyauchi) is preparing to release a love-laced EP with one of the tracks dedicated to her daughter who died at birth in 2020. The six-track EP has songs, Uzobuya, Meet again, Don’t leave, Dzoka, Thalitha Kumi featuring Asaph and Mjolo featuring Awa Khiwe and Anita Jackson. Lee McHoney said the EP that she hopes to release before mid-year carries various messages linked to love. The tracks were produced by Larynx from Bulawayo and Nyasha Timbe from Harare. “The EP is mostly about love from the different experiences people have after falling in love — from the honeymoon phase right up to the breakup. Meet again is dedicated to my late daughter who died at birth in 2020 which led to the other song Thalitha Kumi, a somewhat gospel song talking about the resurrection of a young girl in the Bible,” said Lee McHoney. The artiste has two children, a nine-year-old and another who is two months old. Reflecting on the time she lost her child, Lee McHoney said: “It was a really difficult time because I didn’t understand why it happened. I believe there was some sort of negligence on the facility part and I had an emergency C-Section as well.” The musician who has one album and an EP and she is also talented at acting, something that she realised last year. She had a successful acting stint that saw her clinching the Roil Bulawayo Arts Awards Outstanding TV/Film actress going for her role as Mai Noku on Wadiwa Wepamoyo last year. “When my acting career bloomed, I wasn’t expecting it because I didn’t have much experience in the acting field,” she said. Turning to the popular Wadiwa Wepamoyo series, Lee McHoney said producers are now working on filming Season 3. “We’re working on season three of Wadiwa Wepamoyo that will be shot in the next few weeks. I’ll try to attend as many auditions as I can so that I grow in the acting industry,” she said. In order to grow her acting career, Lee McHoney recently joined the regionally acclaimed Becky Casting Agency that is based in South Africa. – @mthabisi_mthire