The Chronicle Thandeka Moyo-Ndlovu, Senior Health Reporter
MPILO Central Hospital is in dire need of sanitary pads and diapers with reports that two abandoned children are taken to the public institution weekly. Officials said more than half of the hospital’s female patients cannot afford sanitary wear hence the need to ensure their reproductive health rights are protected. This came out during a donation of diapers and sanitary pads by the Zanu-PF Women’s League’s South Africa branch. The donation, which was handed over to the hospital by the Bulawayo province Women’s League will cater for women and children. Acting principal nursing officer Matron Phineas Sithole said the donation will go a long way in alleviating needs of disadvantaged babies and women. On average, a baby needs four diapers daily while women who have just delivered may use up to five pads daily depending on their condition. “We have disadvantaged families whose babies do not have diapers and at the same time patients who come here and are forced to stay longer than expected without enough supply of diapers,” said Matron Sithole. “We also keep abandoned children picked from streams and the streets who are in need of constant supply of diapers. On average we have one or two abandoned children weekly meaning we are in need of more donations.” Matron Sithole said since Mpilo is a referral hospital, some patients in general wards are in need of pads and adult diapers. “Of the about 200 female patients that we have daily in general wards, more than half of those do not afford pads and we appeal to well-wishers to also remember them,” said Matron Sithole. He also appealed to well-wishers to donate clothes to needy patients at Mpilo. Zanu-PF Central Committee member Senator Molly Mpofu said the donated items were sourced by the Women’s League branch in South Africa. She said the Bulawayo Women’s League was ready to serve Mpilo and help the institution provide better services to members of the public. “We are here to remind Mpilo staff that we too, as the Women’s League, are concerned about the welfare of patients who come to Mpilo. This hospital serves people from all over the southern region and we realised that we should chip in and help provide pregnant women and babies with these pads and diapers,” said Sen Mpofu. –@thamamoe