The Chronicle Mbulelo Mpofu, Showbiz Reporter
ONE is solitude, two is a couple and to singer MJ Sings (real name Mncedisi Jeremiah Ncube), three is a gang – Gang O to be precise. Two months ago, three artistes, Murphy Cubic, MJ Sings and Amany joined forces to create Gang O and together, the trio has released a number of songs and wants to be a force to reckon with this year. Off the EP La Liga, the clique has enjoyed success with Koloyi and Thixo with their visuals amassing over 4 000 views. Gang O member, MJ Sings said the forming of the group was a learning curve for him adding that the year 2021 served as a launch pad for works to be done in 2022. On forming the group, MJ Sings said: “The experience has been amazing and there’s so much I’ve learnt by just being around the team. I’ve learnt how to be a team player. The process has been good for my growth musically, just being around great creatives and visionaries. “It’s also introduced the MJ Sings brand to a whole different audience. 2021 was thus an introduction to the works in store for 2022.” The Bulawayo-born Afro-pop/Soul and dance singer-songwriter promised a 2022 filled with a lot of content. “There’re a lot of experimental works that were put out and this year, we’re more confident and excited about the works we have in store. There’s so much music, content and projects readily recorded for this year and our mission is to flood the market as much as we can while broadening the reach. “I have a clear understanding of what the audience needs and my job now is to feed the market consistently this year.” Together with the clique, the multi-lingual MJ Sings managed to curtain raise for South African duo, Blaq Diamond last year, but as a solo artiste, he has travelled a lot and shared the stage with Haja (Madagascar), Berita, Tresor Raziki (DRC), Nakhane Toure, Jah Prayzah, Tariro Negitare, Oliver Mtukudzi, Black Umfolosi and Bands of Balleigh just to name a few. He has also co-written with established South African acts such as DJ Sue, DJ Bigsky and Speedy. — @eMKlass_49.