The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Chronicle Reporter
The family of a 15-year-old boy from Bulawayo with hydrocephalus is appealing for nearly $900 000 to cover his medical bills after complications arose when he underwent surgery last week. The boy, Lothando Dube, was diagnosed with hydrocephalus, a condition that results in the build-up of fluid in the brain, when he was just five months old. He has undergone countless surgeries, including one last week to try to drain fluid from his head. Lothando’s mother, Ms Samkeliso Mhlanga, said he has to go under the knife again because there have been complications following last week’s surgery. “The operation that was done to Lothando wasn’t successful because the water is still building up in his head. He is back in theatre for another operation in order to correct the problem,” said Ms Mhlanga. She said her son is admitted to Mater Dei Hospital. Ms Mhlanga said she is appealing for over $900 000 that will cover the doctors’ fees, as medical aid does not cover anything. “So far we have received about US$100 and $15 000. Lothando needs $884 000 for the first operation. Now that there’s a second one, I think it’ll be more. We haven’t mentioned the fees for the bed and all. I hope people can help Lothando and I can be reached on 0771 372 708. We are at 20204 Pumula South. I am not employed and his father works at Davies Granite,” said Ms Mhlanga. Lothando, who used to learn at King George VI was diagnosed with hydrocephalus after his mother noticed his head expanding. When he was eight months old, doctors placed Lothando’s first shunt. A shunt is the most common treatment for hydrocephalus. It is a flexible tube called a catheter placed into the area of the brain where cerebrospinal fluid is produced. The shunt drains excess cerebrospinal fluid from the brain to another part of the body, where it can be more easily absorbed. However, it was removed after two months after it developed problems. Since then, he has had surgeries to remove and put new shunts; when he was two and five years old, and again in 2014. Ms Mhlanga said her son has had special needs ever since and this has been expensive, especially on the medical side. “Because of this ailment, my son cannot walk, he uses a wheelchair and he has to be fed. Also, he uses diapers. On top of that, he has fits, and there is some medication that he is on for that. He goes to physiotherapy so that his arms and legs don’t stay permanently bent, but this is costly. We have medical aid, but it’s not adequate cover,” said Ms Mhlanga.