The Chronicle Thandeka Moyo-Ndlovu, Senior Reporter 
WHILE the world was ushering in the New Year, grateful for the gift of life, Josphat Sibanda from Pumula allegedly drowned his girlfriend in a sewer pond over an undisclosed dispute. He was spotted by a couple in the wee hours of Saturday. The couple, however, failed to rescue the late Constance Chitete, who was screaming for help, and they called the police. Police attended the scene and found Sibanda still drowning the woman in the sewer pond and apprehended him. She was pronounced dead on arrival at Mpilo Central Hospital. Sibanda is among 690 residents arrested in Bulawayo on New Year’s Eve for various crimes, including violating lockdown regulations. Bulawayo provincial police spokesperson Inspector Abednico Ncube confirmed the incident yesterday saying it is one of two murder cases recorded on Saturday. “A couple was doing some exercises in Pumula near a church when they heard cries coming from a certain direction. They drew closer and found a man forcing a woman down a sewer pond and they tried to restrain him, but the man overpowered them. “They called police who attended the scene and still found Sibanda forcing his girlfriend down the sewer pit. He threw stones at them as they apprehended him, while Chitete was rushed to Mpilo Central Hospital.” Insp Ncube said in the second incident, 24-year-old John Lunga stabbed his friend in the head and stomach in a fight over beer. The two were at a shebeen located at 14442 Nkulumane at 2am when the incident occurred. “We appeal for information that may help us locate Lunga. It is sad to note that this incident occurred while residents were contravening curfew times and regulations.” He said this past New Year’s Eve was generally calm for Bulawayo under the circumstances which was also a result of pleas from police and health officials. Insp Ncube said the majority of residents heeded calls to safeguard lives and stay safe from Covid-19 and crime. “However, at least 690 people were arrested for violating lockdown regulations. Bulawayo Central had the highest with 378 followed by Nkulumane with 260. Two murder cases were received where one was a case of passion as a man killed his partner in Pumula South, while the other one was of two imbibers both aged 24 years and from Nkulumane, who fought over beer at a shebeen in Nkulumane around 2am,” said Insp Ncube. “Police deployments saw the city recording only 12 minor accidents, with no injuries or deaths. A total of 26 vehicles were also impounded and 46 drivers arrested for traffic offences.” Insp Ncube said the Bulawayo community played an important role in working with the police to achieve this sanity. “One person was arrested for inciting violence in Makokoba on New Year’s Eve. The man, Leon Ncube, came from Trenance to cause disorder in Makokoba, but was arrested before he could disrupt sanity. As Zimbabwe Republic Police in Bulawayo, we promise a full measure of our services during the year 2022 and beyond.” he said. Insp Ncube said residents are free to join police community policing initiatives, which include business against crime forum, neighbourhood watch committees, junior call clubs, crime consultative committees and churches against crime. — @thamamoe