The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
THE Zifa extraordinary congress set for January 29 has reportedly been given an all-clear by Fifa, which had initially asked for an explanation on why the concerned delegates couldn’t wait for 90 days as well as the source of funding for the meeting. After getting a satisfactory explanation, Fifa is now expected to send its own representatives to the congress, which would effectively endorse whatever resolutions are made at the EGM. The congress follows a meeting request by 27 Zifa councillors who laid a number of charges against the executive committee. The councillors also want to revoke the mandate of one or all members of the executive committee in line with Article 22 (m) of the Zifa constitution. Speaking on behalf of the councillors, Zifa Northern Region boss Martin Kweza confirmed that there were two issues that Fifa asked them to provide details on regarding the extraordinary congress. “Fifa wanted to know why we couldn’t wait for the 90 days as stipulated in the constitution and we explained to them that the executive committee was and is still on suspension, whose conditions were very clear so even after the 90 days they were still not going to be able to respond to our EGM request, hence we invoked Article 28 (2) of the Zifa constitution,” said Kweza. He said the second request from Zurich, Switzerland, was about who would fund the congress after claims that the Sports and Recreation Commission was behind the EGM request and would also be funding the meeting. “They asked for the source of funding which was duly given to them. We informed Fifa that our members were going to meet all the financial needs and no one else,” said Kweza. There had been fears that since only 27 delegates appended their signatures in the petition for an EGM, the other 31 delegates were against the call for a congress and would therefore, veto any resolution passed at the extraordinary congress. It has, however, emerged that more delegates have given their support and promised to vote for football, not individuals. “There is no need to fear anything, I can confidently tell you that we have the numbers. The 27 being talked about are for administrative purposes only. Remember, for instance, we have 14 Premier Soccer League governors that were said to have appended their signatures yet the actual number is 17, so be rest assured all is in order, resolutions will pass,” said a delegate, speaking on condition of anonymity. For an EGM to sail through, two thirds of those in attendance must consent to a proposal and with Zifa having 58 delegates, it means 38 must agree to the proposals in the event that all the 58 attend. Asked about the issue of numbers, Kweza said they were not losing sleep over the numbers’ technicality. “That is something we are not worried about, let’s wait for January 29,” he said.