The Chronicle Patrick Chitumba, Midlands Bureau Chief 
THE Zanu-PF Midlands Provincial Coordinating Committee (PCC) has finally elected a new provincial executive committee that will help lead the province following provincial party elections held on December 28. Two weeks ago, the PCC meeting at Zanu-PF Winnery Convention Centre failed to elect the new leadership following disruptions by rowdy elements. The new executive members join the Minister of State for Midlands Provincial Affairs and Devolution Larry Mavima, who was elected uncontested to the position of provincial chairman, Cde Tsitsi Zhou who is the provincial Women’s League chair and Cde Ernest Dzoro, who was voted provincial youth chairperson. Former Zanu-PF youth league deputy secretary Cde Edward Chakanyuka Chiherenge will deputise Minister Mavima. Shurugwi South MP, Cde Edmund Mkaratigwa becomes provincial secretary for administration, Chirumhanzu MP Barbara Rwodzi becomes provincial secretary for finance and Minister of Public Service, Labour and Social Welfare Professor Paul Mavima is the new secretary for legal affairs. Zhombe MP Cde Edmore Samambwa and Chirumanzu-Zibagwe MP Prosper Machando made it to the provincial executive as secretaries for health and child care, and gender and culture respectively. In his address to the new executive, Minister Mavima urged party members to be united. “My plea to you comrades as your chairman, is that we unite and or at the least attempt to unite. In retrospect our differences are very minor as we all claim to be 100 percent behind President Mnangagwa our current and future President in 2023,” he said. Minister Mavima urged members to put personal differences aside and rally to win by- elections set for March and the 2023 elections. He said he is willing and fully committed to work with the new PEC. Minister Mavima also ordered party members to stop denigrating each other. “Comrades, I still notice negative comments about individuals and groups and some of which are extremely upsetting and not unifying at all in various social media platforms. May I once more request all comrades to refrain from negative comments that will continue to divide us. Let us focus on those positive comments that will build and strengthen our President and party in general,” he said. “This is not a hard ask, but one that is intended to bring all of us together as we prepare for the tasks ahead. I promise and swear that I will be fair to everyone and work together with all those that share the same goals of Midlands province being number one and delivering the votes we have promised for the president and party at large.”