The Chronicle Mkhululi Ncube, Chronicle Reporter
POLICE in Plumtree have launched a man hunt for a 35-year-old man from Mbila Village in Bulilima District who unleashed a reign of terror in the community by kidnapping, stabbing his victims while threatening to return to kill others. The suspect, Mxolisi Ncube, according to villagers, has a history of violence and has had brushes with the law in Zimbabwe and Botswana for serious crimes. So terrified are the villagers that they have resorted to sleeping and walking in groups after Ncube threatened to return and unleash more violence. Armed with two large knives and a “devastating punch,” villagers said only armed police officers could apprehend Ncube. Police are keen to get hold of him after he allegedly kidnapped a woman last week and dragged her to a hideout in the mountains between Mbila Village and Bezu village where he ruthlessly assaulted her before stabbing her three times. The bloodied victim managed to escape her captor and some villagers rushed her to the local clinic before she was transferred to Plumtree District Hospital due to the seriousness of her condition. Ncube also allegedly went to Tjangwa village where his younger sister is married and severely assaulted her last Thursday, leaving her unconscious. The motive for the brutal assault is unknown. Before fleeing, Ncube allegedly threatened to return and kill his uncle Mr Jerry Mabele Ncube and younger brother only identified as Qie. Matabeleland South Police spokesperson Inspector Loveness Mangena confirmed the manhunt for the suspect whom she described as a dangerous person. “He is a dangerous person who is armed and people should be careful. If anyone spots him, they should notify the acting officer commanding Bulilima and Mangwe districts Superintendent Gumbo on 0719019042 or 071 555 0752,” she said. Villagers said they would have to sleep with one eye open until police arrested the fugitive. “People are living in fear as long as Mxolisi is not in police custody. Some years back, he attacked an old couple and raped the wife and the two later died at Plumtree Hospital from the injuries he inflicted on them. “When police came for him, he had escaped to Botswana where we gather, he continued his reign of terror,” said an elderly villager who declined to be named for fear of reprisal. “Last week he waylaid and kidnapped a woman by the name Marvelous Moyo (30) who was going to Bezu village. He took her to his hide out area in the mountains and severely beat her and stabbed her three times on the head. She managed to escape by chance and was rushed to hospital.” Another villager narrated how Ncube attacked his sister who is now admitted to the United Bulawayo Hospitals (UBH). “He threatened to kill anyone from his village that he will come across and said his uncle and brother were on his hit list,” said the villager, who was also afraid to be named. “Villagers are now sleeping in groups in some homesteads due to the fear. The police saw this themselves when they came looking for him. We are living in fear and we hope that police can arrest him before something serious happens.”