The Chronicle Yvonne Ncube, Showbiz Reporter
The Mr Zimbabwe contest that took place a fortnight ago in Harare saw male models countrywide locking horns in the battle for the throne. Saymore Machoni, popularly known by the stage name Klate, aka the King Of Water Games, made the City of Kings and Queens proud as he claimed victory and took over the throne by conquering over 20 participants drawn from across the country. Ray Bamala from Harare was the first prince. The 24-year-old Klate said being photogenic and his ability to dress well were the cornerstone of his victory. “I believe that the cornerstone of my victory is the fact that I love looking good and I’m in love with fashion. The main factor being that the camera loves me as much as I love it, the relationship is mutual. My family and friends also played a role in encouraging me to be the best version of myself for the competition. Added Klate: “Mr Zimbabwe was a great experience. Being part of the finalists alone meant a great deal to me. It was a great competition and winning the Mr Zimbabwe best in fitness title was amazing as I’m a gym rat. I believe this is the ladder that I’ll use to reach greater heights.” The final year Industrial and Manufacturing Engineering student at the National University of Science and Technology (Nust) said the modelling industry has opened doors for him that he never imagined. Klate said he has seen great success in his three-year career as a professional model. “I started modelling in 2018 before and joined Truth Models Academy as a professional model. Although it’s not been long since I joined the industry, I’m quite satisfied with my progress as it’s been victory after victory and conquest after conquest. “I can safely say my modelling career has opened other doors for me. I’m serving as Mr Truth 2021 and Mr Man of the Earth Zimbabwe 2021. I’m the brand ambassador as well. Recently, I was appointed as Mr Zimbabwe fitness King 2022. It’s also an honour to be the Upcoming Mr Nust 2022 and Upcoming Mr Nust Fitness King 2022,” he said. – @SeehYvonne