The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
FORMER Zifa vice-president and veteran administrator Tendai Madzorera says present day football administrators tend to lose the plot merely because they don’t consult those that have walked the path before. Madzorera was speaking on the sidelines of the Highlanders’ president Ndumiso Gumede funeral service held in Bulawayo on Monday. Madzorera, who was once at the helm of the Premier Soccer League, said Gumede was instrumental in his rise to the top echelons of domestic football. Madzorera first became popular as secretary in the now defunct AmaZulu at the club’s formation in 1995. He moved to the PSL as vice-chairman and then chairman from 2002 to 2005. “The very first thing that Gumede told me when l met him was that in football there is money, but never take that money. If you do not take football money, football will pay you. The second thing which he told me is that if you are to run football properly, you must carry the Bible with you. I asked him what Bible are you talking about and he said the constitution of football. He told me that if you follow the constitution, you will never go wrong,” said Madzorera. He said administrators of today are not open to advice from former administrators. “Every time l got appointed to a position l would go to Gumede and ask for guidance. He would tell me all l want to know because he had all the experience one would want in football. He was a teacher and an adviser. He was always open to teach and guide people. l really learnt a lot from him. “The problem with the new generation is that they think if you seek advice from former leaders, you are taking away their responsibility, which is not the case. What they don’t actually know is that by consulting you get loads of knowledge. Our administrators should have the culture of going back to the elders and seek advice on how to run football. Unfortunately, Gumede has left with all his knowledge. “I know Charles Mabika loves to say Gumede is arguably the best administrator we have had, but l would like to assure you that he is not arguably, but the best we have had. I learnt from him and will always appreciate what he did for our football.” – @innocentskizoe