The Chronicle Yoliswa Dube-Moyo, Matabeleland South Bureau Chief
POLICE have raised concern over the frequency of murder cases and crimes of passion in Matabeleland South Province. Early this month, police arrested a 25-year-old man in connection with a case of murder which occurred at Majoda Farm in West Nicholson, Gwanda District. The suspect, who was allegedly drunk and misbehaving, struck the victim (45) several times on the head and stomach with two burning logs over an unknown issue resulting in the instant death of the victim. Within a space of two days after the West Nicholson murder, police arrested Patrick Ngulube (52) in connection with a murder case which occurred at night at Zimbili B in Gadade Village, Fort Rixon, Insiza District. The suspect pounced on his ex-wife Khauhelo Sibanda and fatally struck her with an unknown sharp object on the head after an argument over an undisclosed issue. Local sources said the suspect had been in the habit of attacking his ex-wife following their separation with village elder interventions not yielding positive results in bringing peace to the estranged couple. Meanwhile, police in Gwanda are appealing for information which may lead to the arrest of Orgen Moyo of Nkwidzi Village in connection with a murder case in which the victim Morris Ncube (24) succumbed to the injuries inflicted on him by the suspect at Nkwidzi Business Centre. The suspect stabbed the victim with an okapi knife on the head after a misunderstanding over an undisclosed issue at a beer drinking binge. Commenting on the murder cases, national police spokesperson Assistant Commissioner Paul Nyathi said the police were engaged in awareness campaigns where members of the public were encouraged to resolve conflict amicably. “As we speak, officers commanding provinces throughout the country are engaging traditional leaders who include chiefs to talk about murder cases, rape cases, robbery cases and other crimes. The message is focused mainly on promoting peace, safety and resolving conflict without resorting to violence,” said Asst Comm Nyathi. He said the police Victim Friendly Unit focuses on issues to do with violence against women and children. “We have community relations liaison officers who are tasked mainly with conducting campaigns and engagements with community leaders and members so that we take away this issue of trying to resolve disputes through violence. We’re doing several activities as a way of promoting peace and conflict resolution besides effecting arrests when a crime is committed or compiling dockets when a crime is committed,” said Asst Comm Nyathi. — @Yolisswa