The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
THE Dugmore and Fellowship golf tournament tees off at the Bulawayo Golf Club tomorrow with a field of 40 taking to the greens to mark the official start of the Zimbabwe Golf Association season. It’s the traditional golf season opener, which, however, failed to take place last year due to the Covid-19 pandemic that saw the Government suspending all sporting activities as the country battled the pandemic. Matabeleland Golf Society president Victor Suerga said more entries were still coming amid excitement among golfers on the return of the tournament, which was last won by Matthew Williams from the host club in 2019. “A field of around 40 is expected. Entries are still coming in and we are likely to pass that figure. It’s a 54-hole Strokeplay Championship Division competition. Players play 36 holes on Saturday and 18 holes on Sunday,” said Suerga. According to rule 3.1 of golf, stroke play competition consists of competitors completing each hole of a stipulated round or rounds and for each round, returning a scorecard of which there is a gross score for each hole. The competitor who plays the fewest number of strokes in the stipulated holes is the winner. In a handicapp competition the competitor with the lowest net score in the stipulated rounds is the winner. He said being an opening national event, there was naturally an aura of excitement among golfers keen to get a head start in 2022, but crucially to get the much needed National Order of Merit points. “National Order of Merit points are at stake, World Amateur Golf Ranking recognition and a selector for the South African stroke play coming up in early March,” said Suerga. He described the course condition as excellent, applauding the host club for a fantastic job in preparing the course to be in a great condition which is likely to see under par scores. “Bulawayo Golf Club have done a fantastic job with the course and the rains have played a big role too. Under par scores are anticipated under such ideal conditions,” said Suerga.