The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
HWANGE-based Zifa Southern Region Division One side Moto Moto have been booted out of this year’s league after failing to meet required standards to be part of the league. Indications are that the club has already folded, although it has not communicated with the Southern Region football governing body. Zifa Southern region board member for competitions Fiso Siziba said: “We have tried our best to engage the team, but to no avail. As an association we’ve failed to gather who the contact person for the club is at the moment. How do you rein in a team that does not even have a vaccination record? “Even when it comes to the paying of affiliation fees, they have not paid. So, what we have done is rope in CIWU to fill the gap left by Moto Moto. However, CIWU are not ready to play this week so they will commence their games on the next match day. All the other teams are ready and are fully paid up in terms of affiliation fees.” With the Northern, Eastern and Central Region in motion, it was only the Southern Region that was still battling to put its house in order. Delays in the season kick-off were caused by the region’s failure to conclude and confirm the total number of teams to compete in the league. To test its readiness for commencement of the league, Zifa Southern Region hosted the Wafa Wafa knockout competition involving all the fully paid-up teams. Hwange FC and Arenal will face off in the final to be played at the Colliery Stadium on a date yet to be announced. Southern Region Division One Match Day 1 Fixtures Tomorrow
Ajax Hotspurs vs Arenel Movers, (W/City 12pm), Zim Saints vs ZPC Hwange (W/City 3pm), Binga Pirates vs Bosso 90 (Binga 3pm), Hwange FC vs Makhandeni Pirates (Hwange 3pm), Casmyn vs Indlovu Iyanyathela (Turkmine 3pm), Mosi Rovers vs CIWU Vic Falls 3pm, Mountain Climbers vs Quality Foods (Luveve B Arena 3pm), Ratanang FC vs Talen Vision Luveve (B Arena 3pm) Sunday
Indonsakusa vs Mainline Luveve B Arena 12pm