The Chronicle Oliver Kazunga, Senior Business Reporter 
GOVERNMENT has suspended the mandatory ethanol blending of petrol and cut the price of the commodity by between 0,5 percent and 1 percent. The cost of diesel, however, remains constant in US-dollar terms at US$1,38 per litre. Zimbabwe adopted the mandatory petrol blending scheme sometime in 2011 and by 2014, the blended petrol grade E15 was available on the market. The intervention was introduced as part of measures to address fuel supply shortages at the time and the need to promote local investment. In an update issued yesterday, the Zimbabwe Energy Regulatory Authority (Zera) said the blending ratio had been reviewed from E10 to E0. “The public and operators are advised that the blending ratio has been reviewed from E10 to E0,” said the regulator. “Operators may sell the petroleum products below the prescribed prices depending on their trading advantages and should display prices in a prominent place as provided by the fuel pricing regulations.” According to Zera, the price of diesel in local currency had been reviewed downwards to $149,55 per litre from $150,31 last month. The pump price for petrol in local currency is now at $152,87 from $154,56 per litre while in foreign currency it was pegged at US $1,41 from US$1,42 a litre. Comment would not be obtained from Zera chief executive officer, Mr Edington Mazambani, as his mobile number was not going through while the authority’s communications officer Mrs Lindiwe Nyoni had not responded to written questions by the time of going to print. In recent months, fuel price has been going up with Zera citing a general rise in fuel prices on the international market.
In addition, the fuel price has been increased in tandem with the floating exchange rate on the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe forex auction trading system. For the better part of last year, there were increases in the Free on Board (FOB) prices for petrol and diesel and this has had a knock-on effect on the pump price of fuel. —@KazungaOliver