The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
THE race for promotion into the Premier Soccer League begins on Saturday when the Zifa Southern Region Division One league rolls into action after a two-year absence. With the Northern, Eastern and Central leagues having all resumed play, it is only the Southern Region that had still not put its house in order. Delay in the season kick-off was caused by the region’s failure to conclude and confirm the total number of teams to compete in the league. Zifa Southern Region has, however, been hosting the Wafa Wafa knockout competition as a curtain raiser for league action. All, but one of the 16 teams took part in the knockout tournament, which reaches its climax when Hwange FC face Arenal in the final. “We are going to begin our league this weekend as per schedule. We had intended to have played the final of the Wafa Wafa by the time we started the league, but that has not been the case. “What we will opt for now is to begin our league and then push the final to a later date. All the teams, except Moto Moto, appear to be ready for action. We shall be accessing the situation with them to see if they will be part of the league. Besides that, we are ready to start our league,” said Fiso Siziba, Zifa Southern Region board member for competitions. He also revealed that the venue for the Wafa Wafa Cup final will be played at the Colliery Stadium on a date to be announced. According to the fixtures, Week 1’s match will be a clash between Makomo and Mosi Rovers, while former Premiership side Hwange, entertain CIWU at the Colliery Stadium. Zimbabwe Saints will be home to ZPC Hwange and Moto Moto host league debutants Quality Foods in what should be an easy battle for the soldiers. Bulawayo will witness the return of a city derby in Week 17 when Bosso 90 collides with Chauya Chikwata in a potentially explosive encounter. Week One fixtures
Ajax vs Arenel, Binga United vs Bosso90, Hwange vs CIWU, Casmyn vs Indlovu Iyanyathela, Mainline vs Makhandeni Pirates, Makomo vs Mosi Rovers, Talen Vision vs Trumus, Moto Moto vs Quality Foods, Zimbabwe Saints vs ZPC Hwange. – @innocentskizoe