The Chronicle Thandeka Moyo-Ndlovu, Senior Health Reporter 
THE Women’s Coalition of Zimbabwe (WCoZ) has called for improved media coverage of Covid-19, which has so far claimed the lives of 5 180 people countrywide. According to the organisation, Covid-19 media reports have lessened, which probably explains the high levels of complacency being exhibited in different parts of the country. As of Monday, Zimbabwe had recorded a cumulative total of 223 000 cases and 196 515 recoveries. In a situational report, WCoZ said information fatigue could reverse gains made in the fight against Covid-19. “We note, with growing concern, reduced media coverage of the Covid-19 pandemic in Zimbabwe, as the nation continues to implement the vaccination programme. Unfortunately Covid-19 is still of concern and we cannot let our guard down,” said WCoZ. WCoZ added that the media has a major role to play in addressing matters of national concern and also encouraging healthy behaviour which is crucial in the fight against Covid-19 and other diseases. “We are concerned about the high number of community deaths which require vigilance from the media so that communities are able to fight the pandemic. We further note the Covid-19 fatigue, not only among communities, but also among stakeholders, duty bearers, the media and other organisations that have been supplying the public with relevant information on Covid-19,” read the statement. “We also call upon the editors and respective newsrooms to continue to prioritise the coverage and reporting of Covid-19 as we face difficulties in navigating the curve of infections.” WCoZ also called on members of the public to continue getting vaccinated against the global pandemic as uptake continues to go down. “There has been a decline in the vaccination rate on a daily basis, which in the past week has been averaging below 5 000. We further note little uptake of the third dose or booster vaccine among citizens. The low numbers could suggest renewed vaccine hesitancy among communities, against the backdrop of a Covid-19 variant (Omicron) which has been largely perceived by communities as mild,” read the statement. — @thamamoe