The Chronicle Angela Sibanda, Showbiz Reporter
Comedian Ankela Zex Mdawini (real name Hidden Sibanda) is expected to stage his debut performance at the Bulawayo Theatre on Friday alongside other local stand-up comedians. The 53-year-old, whose work is popular on social media platforms and local buses where he plies his trade, will perform for the first time at a public venue with the support of renowned stand-up comedian Dalu Da Poet and Frank. The much-anticipated show is being organised by the youthful Entertainment Box Events who said they believe that the artiste has great potential as a stand-up comedian. One of the organisers, Bhekumuzi Ronald Khumalo said the show is meant to promote Ankela Zex’s talent as well as introduce him to diverse audiences. “As young people who’ve been following his work for quite some time, we believe that he has great potential as a stand-up comedian. We’re hosting this event to promote the comedian’s talent and catapult his career,” Khumalo said. He said they have also lined-up a series of live shows where the famous “hello charge office” joker will tour Bulawayo meeting his fans. “Most people know the voice and the jokes, but they’ve never met him so this will offer them an opportunity to witness their favourite artiste live in action.” Ankela Zex’s satirical sentiments appeal across all characters and religions. He is the face behind the voice of a landlord and charmer to Samantha owePumula, ilodger — a larger-than-life character that took the internet by storm in 2021. His immense talent saw him being nominated for the Pumula Royal Arts and Community Awards in the Outstanding Male Comedian category. However, while performing a skit on lodgers/tenants during his usual stand-up comedy in a bus earlier this month, he irked some passengers who assaulted him, accusing him of performing a viral joke that they claimed led to their landlords raising their rentals. He suffered a swollen upper lip and the case was taken to court. But his hosting of stand-up comedy shows, however, shows that this incident took nothing from the famous Old Pumula comedian.