The Chronicle Stephen Mpofu, Perspective
HOT on the heels of Christmas, Zimbabweans, like people in other countries, made New Year resolutions to inaugurate the beginning of 2022, today, in hopes, or desires, for better things in the 12 months ahead. In our case, and in light of the unilateral, satanic Western economic sanctions imposed 20 years ago in anger at the land reform programme meant to unite Zimbabweans with the land unilaterally seized by “those without knees,” it behoves on our people to have come up with unmitigated patriotic resolutions to overcome challenges that stand as road blocks to a brave new future for all. A preliminary report by Professor Alena Douhan, a United Nations Special Rapporteur who visited Zimbabwe in October last year, revealed that the sanctions by the United States of America and her Western allies had done untold damage to our country by inhibiting the building of essential infrastructure and international and inter-institutional co-operation necessary for the achievement of the sustainable development goals. She noted, for instance, that the lack of resources limited access to development loans, and reluctance of foreign entities to deal with Zimbabwean partners or invest in the economy, makes it hard and expensive to buy necessary medical and technological equipment, regents and spare parts for the repair and maintenance of water, public transport, telephone and communication systems, schools, hospitals, houses and other public services, thus undermining the enjoyment of many human rights including the right to a decent life. That those who impose the sanctions remain with their heads buried in the sand, thus spiting calls by the Southern African Development Community, the African Union, and the rest of the progressive world to lift the draconian economic embargo — which would have come as a Christmas gift to Zimbabweans — shows how hell-bent the racists are on frustrating our people suffering economically so that they must turn against their Government after the West failed to oust Zanu-PF from power in protest at land reform. This situation therefore, calls for Zimbabwe and her progressive allies in the East to work much more closely for the survival of the revolution that brought freedom and independence to our motherland. But even more critical Zimbabweans, regardless of their different political persuasions should link arms to protect and develop the motherland and God’s endowment to us for a better future for our children and children’s children. As such the Government must be commended and supported by all in its programme to provide agricultural skills to young Zimbabweans to provide food for the country and for export to earn much-needed foreign currency. Parents and traditional leaders out there in the country should rally their support to the Government’s initiative for the youth to play a greater developmental role at home instead of crossing borders to offer slave labour for lack of something more meaningful back home. Equally important, are plans at various levels of our society for women and girls to play greater roles in national developmental issues. But, of course, any divergent practices such as corruption are inhibitive to various levels of development which is why the Zimbabwe Anti-Corruption Commission seeks prosecuting powers to end the rot. It is therefore to be hoped that Zacc’s societal cleansing wishes will be granted for our nation to move forward politically, socially, and economically without stigmatisation by unholy practises. Of still greater importance, uninverted patriots must unite to ensure that our motherland should not be turned into a no-go investment and tourism haven by armed robbers who appear to be on the increase in our country threatening the lives of innocent people and businesses. While this country has abolished capital punishment which would instil the fear of God in would-be criminals of the cut in point, jail terms to incarcerate the criminals for terms that almost resonate with capital punishment might act as a deterrent. As things are the onus lies on every Zimbabwean to expose these heinous criminals, be they relatives or not to security forces to apprehend them to protect businesses and lives in the process. Or do the criminals easily acquire the dangerous weapons with which they terrorise their victims so that tighter controls in accessing the guns becomes easily imperative to save lives in worst-case scenarios?