The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
CASTLE Lager Premier Soccer League (PSL) clubs have been given ample time to make adjustments to their squads, as player registration only closes on March 31. Teams have been busy in the market strengthening their sides ahead of resumption of the PSL action on February 12. Ambitious Bulawayo Chiefs are among the sides that have gone for experience during the present transfer window, adding strikers Obidiah Tarumbwa, Obriel Chirinda and Perfect Chikwende. They are also set to register right-back Ian Nekati, who they signed from Chicken Inn last year. The Ninjas are said to have wrapped up their mid-season signings by capturing the services of national team central midfielder Kelvin Madzongwe. Highlanders, who want to address their striking problems, have only managed to add 26-year-old forward Stanley Ngala from FC Platinum, Young Warriors goalkeeper Raphael Pitisi and Rahman Kutsanzira from FC Platinum. Bosso will be among the teams relieved that the transfer window runs up to March, as they hope to find a striker from the lower leagues, which recently kicked off. Dynamos have announced the capture of left-back Brendon Mpofu, striker Evans Katema and midfielder Ralph Kawondera. In a memo written to clubs yesterday, the PSL said clubs must have registered all their players and technical officials in order to obtain 2022 licences. The 2021 players and technical officials’ licences expired on December 31. “The player registration period opened on 8 January and shall close on 31 March 2022. The club registration forms must be completed and submitted to our office not later than Friday 28 January 2022. “No friendly or practice matches shall be played without clearances from our office. Request for the said matches must be submitted at least 72 hours before date of the match. Clubs are required to submit stadium lease agreements to our offices not later than 31 January 2022,” wrote the PSL chief executive officer Kennedy Ndebele in the memo. Clubs will be notified of the annual subscription fees in due course. – @ZililoR