The Chronicle Yvonne Ncube, Showbiz Reporter
“Having talent in acting is not enough, be qualified for it!” These sentiments were shared by Thandolwenkosi Ndlovu as she urged artistes to get appropriate qualifications. Known by the stage name, UMaGatsheni, Ndlovu recently graduated from the Zimbabwe Theatre Academy. The 22-year-old actress, who has featured in a couple of local dramas, said she enrolled at the theatre school upon realisation that most artistes have the talent, but they cannot bear the industry because they lack skills. “I went to the Zimbabwe Theatre Academy after realising that young artistes are in the creative art industry because they have the talent, but they can’t put up with the industry because they lack the skills. So I wanted to be the change they hope to see. “Of course, the gurus try their best to nurture up-and-coming talent but at the end of the day, it’s about what you can put on the table as an artist and the skills you have so as to be a creative that can sustain him/herself in the industry,” said uMaGatsheni. She said artistes also deprive themselves of opportunities that need professional qualifications. “Artistes lose opportunities because they hold onto their good talent, but that is not enough to fill in the resume. Sometimes big opportunities may come and everyone may know that you’re best for that position, but because you’ll not be professionally qualified for them, you may miss out. “So, I urge artistes to study professionally in their areas of interest, go for that certificate.” Thandolwenkosi said the acknowledgment of her work in the form of awards has kept her growing in the industry. “I’ve received various awards and I believe that this has been the catalyst of my growth in the arts industry. My greatest achievement was winning the best actress award during the Geraldine Roche Drama competition last year.” The actress who is the projects manager at Young Artists Development School said the school scooped three awards at the Midlands Teens Awards for its ongoing theatre project Indodakazi. The same project was also nominated in  three categories at the Roil Bulawayo Arts Awards. As a parting shot, uMaGatsheni said teamwork is the cornerstone of all success and further encouraged people to get appropriate qualifications for their jobs. “To inspire other creatives requires one to be truthful to themself and the process. As a result, I need to keep the process original, creative and engage other creatives. “This is because for one to inspire, you should be hot-spotting positive energy to others in the space which I will gladly do,” she said. — @SeehYvonne