The Chronicle Kaizer Chiefs duo of Itumeleng Khune and Dumisani Zuma will return to duty this week facing similar situations and yet hoping for a change of fortunes for what remains of the season. For all his experience and senior status at the club and being available for selection, Khune is yet to get a minute in the league with Chiefs past the halfway stage. He sat on the bench once while deputising for Bruce Bvuma back in August in the second league before disappearing from the matchday squad. Chiefs have played 16 league games to date with Daniel Akpeyi being the preferred choice between the posts for most of the games despite Khune being injury-free and at training. Khune is now set for minutes in the DStv Compact Cup after being voted for to represent Warriors FC along with Bruce Bvuma. The only appearance that Khune has made this term was in the MTN8 defeat to Mamelodi Sundowns when he conceded twice during regulation time. However, for all his evident troubles he has found himself selected to play for Warriors FC in the DStv Compact Cup proving just how popular he remains with fans. The 34-year-old remains under contract until the end of next season and is already the longest-serving player at the club having made his first-team debut in 2007. Recent injuries and loss of form have left him no longer guaranteed of being the first choice at a club where he was first choice for over a decade. Facing a similar situation to Khune is Zuma. Zuma has left himself with plenty to ponder for his behaviour which has dragged the club’s name into the mud. He started off the season injured and was then caught up in the controversy of driving while under the influence of alcohol at the beginning of November. Into his fifth season since arriving from Bloemfontein Celtic, the 26-year-old is yet to play this season. His last appearance for the club was in May last year against Simba through a season in which he scored once in 19 games all of which were either as a substitute or he was pulled out after starting. He has made 100 appearances in his time at the club with a return of 12 goals. Zuma is yet to play under Stuart Baxter since the veteran gaffer’s return. All other players yet to get minutes in the first team are players from the club’s MDC team. — Kickoff