The Chronicle Angela Sibanda, Showbiz Reporter
Afro-soul crooner MJ Sings is set to share the stage with South African Afro-pop artist Mlindo the Vocalist in Bulawayo tomorrow. As all roads lead to Umguza Yacht Club, MJ Sings (born Mncedisi Jeremiah Ncube) is optimistic that the event will have a great impact on him as an individual and his brand as an artist. MJ Sings, his producer Murphy Cubic together with Amany joined forces to form Gang O, a trio that produced an EP with a collection of songs that rocked the festive mood last month. In an interview ahead of the show, the Bulawayo-born Afro-pop/Soul and dance singer-songwriter said the idea is to support Mlindo while making sure that the crowds stay hooked to the local MJ Sings brand. “The audience might be there for the Mlindo Experience but our intentions are to also make sure that they get hooked on the MJ Sings brand on the night,” he said. The musician has shared the stage with a number of local and international artistes including Haja (Madagascar), Berita, Tresor Raziki (DRC), Nakhane Toure, Jah Prayzah, Tariro Negitare, Oliver Mtukudzi, Black Umfolosi and Bands of Balleigh just to name a few. His first experience in sharing the stage with an international artist was with Tresor Raziki during his time in South Africa. He said this uplifted him and made him more determined. “The first-ever biggest international act I worked with was Tresor Raziki. I was still starting out in Johannesburg and only had one song to my name. “Just being around a different audience and having the energy being reciprocated back to me was so uplifting. I’ve never looked back after that.” MJ Sings’ recent songs with Gang O have more of an Amapiano vibe and this has raised questions among his fans as to whether the artist has decided to switch to a different sound. Responding to this, he said the piano taste of his recent works is part of his adventure in experimenting with different sounds and his vocals. “I’ve been getting that question a lot lately and I’d love to relieve the fans by saying that I’m still making music with that Afro-pop/Soul train,” he said. “I love experimenting with my vocals and writing skills. Gang O is the perfect place where I thought I should play around with the piano sound while I finish my own projects.”