The Chronicle Leonard Ncube , Victoria Falls Reporter
FARMERS have been urged to take advantage of the rains being received in most parts of the country and plant mainly short season varieties until next week. The Meteorological Services Department (MSD) predicted normal to above normal rainfall. Some farmers had not planted because of low rainfall received in their areas. In an interview, Agritex provincial officer in charge of Bulawayo and Matabeleland North Mr Dumisani Nyoni said there is still time to plant grain crops and other varieties until January 15. “Most places started receiving rains towards Christmas Day but others like Jambezi in Hwange got the first meaningful rains on January 3. There are many such places but we encourage farmers to continue planting and make sure they have plots that can sustain them and their families. With the current rains, let’s plant until 15 January,” said Mr Nyoni. He encouraged farmers to plant maize, sorghum and millet, and other short season varieties that mature within 90 days. Mr Nyoni encouraged farmers to also grow other crop varieties such as sweet potatoes, cow peas, sugar beans, water melons, cattle melons, sweet reeds and sunflower which can generate revenue. He said all farmers that embraced Intwasa/Pfumvudza farming programme are being given 2kg sunflower seeds and there is still time to plant them until end of the month. Already farmers have received maize, sorghum and millet seeds under the Presidential Input Scheme and distribution of sunflower and sugar beans seeds is expected any time soon, Mr Nyoni added. “There is still time to plant. We encourage farmers to plant sorghum and millet and they can swop with maize at the Grain Marketing Board if they prefer to consume maize because Government allows that. Those with livestock should also plant fodder and also destock because low rainfall results in limited pastures,” said Mr Nyoni. He encouraged them to conserve moisture by making ridges and potholing in their plots to trap run-off. “Those who used conservation farming can put mulch in holes and they can also plant runner crops to reduce moisture loss,” added Mr Nyoni. He said proper weeding and pest scouting are important in crop management especially in low rainfall seasons. Matabeleland North Provincial Affairs and Devolution Minister Cde Richard Moyo who is also a successful farmer and retailer in Umguza encouraged farmers to plant now to ensure food security in the province. “The rains delayed but now that it is raining, let’s plant since we have seeds from the Intwasa programme,” he said. — @ncubeleon