The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
FOR the first time in 24 years, the Zimbabwe senior women’s hockey side reached the semi-finals of the Africa Cup of Nations. For a moment the team reminded the nation of the ‘Golden Girls’ who won Zimbabwe’s first ever gold medal at the 1980 Olympic Games in Moscow in the then Soviet Union. Four decades later the present hockey team is giving the country something to smile about in hockey. The team was recently in Ghana where it gave a good account of itself, bowing out in the semi-finals at the hands of the hosts. The ladies lost to South Africa in their first match at the tournament, beat Uganda and drew with Namibia. They finished fourth in the tournament and just missed out on a bronze medal after they crashed 1-3 to Kenya in a penalty shootout. Former Hockey Association of Zimbabwe (Haz) president Kays Kanyangarara praised the ladies for putting up a spirited fight in the competition. “The girls did very well. They could easily have made it to the final. Bear in mind they have not played any competitive hockey in two years. For their preparations, they played a few social teams. So, we commend them for bravely withstanding teams that have running leagues,” said Kanyangarara. He said there was a need for the game to get more support from the Government. “We need to restart local leagues so that we play more often. Hockey is a very fast game so game time is crucial. Financial support is also needed and government has to support hockey more. We don’t expect the same support as football, although it would be nice. I read that each (Warriors) player at Afcon will get at least US$20 000 in allowances. “If our ladies got US$20 000 for the team towards preparations without any allowances they would have done better. These players pay from their own pockets to represent their country, which is not sustainable. Sadly, hockey does not get any financial assistance from the federation. “This jeopardises even their grading, which we need to keep Zimbabwe in the spotlight. Hockey, if supported, has the potential to make our nation proud at all levels. Under-21 girls will be participating in the Junior World Cup soon and it’s the same scenario. They need help,” said Kanyangarara. After emerging tops in both the men’s and women’s categories, South Africa automatically qualified for the men’s and women’s World Cups. The Women’s World Cup will be co-hosted by Spain and the Netherlands from July 1-17 this year, while the men’s version will be hosted by India from January 13-29 next year. – @innocentskizoe