The Chronicle VAYA Mobility, Zimbabwe’s largest ride-hailing platform-based service, is helping passengers with safe, convenient and reliable transport while at the same time economically empowering its partner drivers. Some VAYA partners this week said the EcoCash Holdings Zimbabwe subsidiary’s taxi and shuttle service had positively impacted their livelihoods in the past couple of years it has been in existence. “I joined VAYA on October 01, 2020,” said Mr Emias Mutinhima. “I got my first partner commission a week later. I must say the amount was actually more than my monthly salary at the time, from my previous employer. “And so, my life immediately changed. My family and I started to afford some things we couldn’t afford before. We even changed our diet and are certainly healthier now.” He added that VAYA is a good, all-season business that one can operate either as an employee or employer. “I want to encourage other business-minded people out there to come into partnership with VAYA and earn some extra income,” he said. Ms Sandra Gwena, a VAYA partner who said she is enjoying the freedom and empowerment that comes with “being your own boss” expressed similar sentiments. “I became a VAYA partner more than two years ago when the electric vehicles were introduced,” she said. “I am glad to say that since then my life has significantly changed. I’m my own boss now, yet I can still do other side hustles as this job is very flexible.” Gwena called on customers to use VAYA because it is safe and reliable. “I want to assure our customers that VAYA is a very safe, convenient and reliable mode of transport because VAYA trips can be tracked. If, say, you forget any valuables in a VAYA vehicle, you’re sure to get them back,” she said. VAYA, which is competitively priced, often runs great promotions for new clients. It was launched in 2018 and it has been growing ever since, to become the largest local platform-based ride-hailing service in the country. VAYA has also now ventured into the logistics business. The company now runs a number of services, including VAYA Lift Driver, a service where a client hails a VAYA vehicle for immediate pick up or for a scheduled time in the future. The service connects the client with the nearest available driver. VAYA Shuttle service is a bus option for five or more passengers, with a personalised “door to door service” for pick-ups and drop offs. The company recently introduced VAYA Club — a car sharing service where clients share a vehicle and split the cost. They make the payment on an individual basis, through a payment portal linked to the VAYA mobile application. Mr Bruce Tafadzwa Gunyere, who has been with VAYA since 2018, said his life and business skills have greatly improved in the last four years. “I can safely say my finances have improved. I started partnering with VAYA while I was employed elsewhere, and due to the flexible nature of the job I was able to raise more money, which almost equated to what I was earning,” he said. Mr Gunyere said he now earns more, and has improved his client relation skills from the exposure he has obtained from interacting with different customers. “I have created a lot of connections by offering good service to customers. There are times I have transported many influential people who were impressed with our services, and this has helped me get better in other areas of my life,” he added. He noted that VAYA has not only brought convenience to the travelling public, but also aligned Zimbabwe with global technological changes and new business practices. “There have been a lot of positive changes to our society since VAYA was introduced into the local market. Some of us who were drivers got extra employment, while those who were not employed got employment, which is helping us all to sustain our families,” said Mr Gunyere.