The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
NEWLY acquired Highlanders’ striker Stanley Ngala says while he is aware of the pressure that comes with playing for a club with passionate and demanding supporters, his mission was to make sure the club’s fortunes are turned around. He said he will put maximum effort and play with all his heart so that Highlanders become fearsome once again and take their rightful place among the giants in local football by winning. “I feel excited about the move because it’s an honour to wear the black and whites stripes. I will play my heart out and try to help the team win games,” said Ngala. The 26-year-old was acquired from FC Platinum on a three-year deal and joins a club probably low in morale and self-belief after going for 540 minutes without, not only failing to win, but firing blanks in all the last six competitive matches. They have so far picked up a single point from three league matches they have played, losing 0-2 to Black Rhinos at the National Sports Stadium, drawing nil-all against Ngezi Platinum Stars at Barbourfields Stadium and a 0-1 loss to Manica Diamonds at Sakubva Stadium to leave them rooted in the relegation bracket. If Tenax shock Chicken Inn in their outstanding match, Bosso’s woeful performances will only be bettered by city neighbours Bulawayo City, who anchor the log standings. However, to their credit, Amakhosi have managed to find the target four times. They are one of only three teams in the league yet to find the target in the opening league matches, with the others being Cranborne Bullets and Caps United. Meanwhile, Highlanders have confirmed that some of the players who were on the coaches’ list were now off the radar. Besides Ngala, coach Mandla Mpofu also wanted Silas Songani, but his contract has since run out and reports are already linking him with a move to Iceland, Bulawayo Chiefs captain Malvin Mkolo and Triangle United goalkeeper Ralph Pitisi. “Some of the players who were on our coaches’ wish list are no longer available, while we are still in talks with others,” said Highlanders’ acting chief executive officer Ronald Moyo without revealing the names. Highlanders need to turn around their fortunes immediately upon resumption of league games next month. Bosso find themselves eight points behind league leaders Manica Diamonds after just three matches.