The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
HIGHLANDERS will review their mid-season wishlist after it emerged that some of their prime targets have already sealed deals elsewhere. Bosso are in the hunt for a striker to solve their goal scoring problems, as they are still searching for their first win and first goal in the Premier Soccer league after three rounds of matches in which they lost twice and drew once. Highlanders started the PSL season with a 2-0 defeat to Black Rhinos, a goalless draw against Ngezi Platinum Stars and a 1-0 loss to Manica Diamonds. Head coach Mandla Mpofu and members of the Bosso technical team had recommended at least three strikers, FC Platinum’s pair of Silas Songani and Stanley Ngala, as well as Obriel Chirinda from Bulawayo Chiefs. Songani, who was also on the radar of Dynamos and Ngezi Platinum Stars, has reportedly signed a contract with Vestri of Iceland, while Chirinda has committed to Bulawayo Chiefs, where he signed a pre-contract in August. Dynamos are reportedly closing in on Ngala, meaning that if Highlanders are to beat their nemesis to the signature of the ex-Bulawayo Chiefs forward, they have to enter into a bidding war. It is unlikely that Highlanders will break the bank to find a goal hungry striker despite having a US$60 000 kitty for signing-on fees availed by principal sponsor Sakunda Holdings, who also sponsor Dynamos. “We are still pursuing the coaches’ wish list in a bid to strengthen the squad. Unfortunately, the majority of them are contracted to other clubs, so it’s not easy to get such players because we have to buy them. There is no club, in their right senses, who can release a contracted player for free. Where it’s impossible, the coaches are looking for alternatives because although it’s important that we strengthen our squad, we remain guided by our budget,” said Ronald Moyo, Highlanders’ spokesperson and acting chief executive officer. Highlanders have a developmental side, Bosso 90, which is supposed to be the feeder for the first team, but striker Mthabisi “Mabobo” Ncube who was promoted to the senior team is yet to make an appearance with the coaches preferring Washington Navaya and Lynoth Chikuhwa. Navaya scored a single goal in Highlanders’ seven games in the Chibuku Super Cup from the group stages to the quarter-finals, while Chikuhwa scored two. Chiefs have strengthened their strike force by adding Obidiah Tarumbwa and Chirinda to their arsenal. Chicken Inn have already moved to replace Chirinda with Cranborne Bullets’ striker Malvern Hwata. Bulawayo City FC are yet to begin transfer business, even though their coach Philani “Beefy” Ncube indicated that he is keen to reinforce his side. — @ZililoR