The Chronicle Thandeka Moyo-Ndlovu, Senior Health Reporter
ALTHOUGH Covid-19 continues to wreak havoc in many communities the world over, the high number of vaccinated citizens remains one of the country’s 2021 success stories. The first few months of the year were deadly and figures continued to rise as a result of the festive holidays. By mid-February Zimbabwe had started rolling out the lifesaving vaccine which according to health officials was effective in reducing the number of Covid-19 deaths. Zimbabwe’s commitment to containing the deadly disease, which had affected the economy and disrupted services was proven by Government that set aside US$100 million to purchase vaccines at the beginning of the year. The country launched its Covid-19 vaccination campaign on February 22, targeting health workers and essential services providers. With the availability of more doses, the vaccination was opened to everyone on a voluntary basis for free. The development allowed the country to open economic activities and by the end of September the country had met the World Health Organisation target to have at least 10 percent of its population vaccinated by the end of that month. Besides the financial commitment to procuring the vaccines, Covid-19 also pushed the Government to invest more in healthcare which saw the reopening of Ekusileni Healthcare Centre in Bulawayo and the refurbishment of other public health institutions to cater for Covid-19. In November, the Ministry of Health and Child Care also extended the vaccination programme to learners and plans are underway to also include those aged from 14-15. While Covid-19 vaccination has allowed countries to open their economic activities, continued adherence to preventive measures to avoid the spread of the virus by wearing face masks, washing hands and social distancing remain critical. In Zimbabwe latest statistics show that new cases and deaths are on the rise. Zimbabwe recorded 2 073 new Covid-19 cases and 30 deaths on Thursday, as the pandemic continues to take a toll on the country. The number of cases had gradually been rising since the start of December last year but so has figures of people who are getting inoculated against the deadly virus. Although the cases remained above 2 000, they were marginally lower than the 2 107 cases reported on Wednesday. All the new cases were community transmissions. Deaths rose from 27 on Wednesday to 30 yesterday with Bulawayo reporting 18, Harare five, Mashonaland Central three, while Manicaland, Mashonaland East, Mashonaland West and Matabeleland North provinces recorded one death each. As of Wednesday, Zimbabwe had 395 hospitalised Covid-19 patients, of which 66 patients were asymptomatic, 279 mild to moderate, 45 had severe symptoms and five were in intensive care units. In terms of the vaccination drive, 6 394 people received the first dose on the day bringing the cumulative number of those who had received the first dose to 4 118 635, while 8 040 received their second dose, taking the total for the second dose to 3 129 823. With booster jabs now being rolled out, 326 people got their shots taking the cumulative total of the third dose to 4 922.
President Mnangagwa recently said booster jabs were being rolled out for frontline health workers, those with chronic diseases and the elderly, to boost their immunity. Zimbabwe has recorded 211 728 cases, 178 332 recoveries and 4 997 deaths. In his New Year message, Bulawayo provincial medical director Dr Maphios Siamuchembu said Covid-19 has been with the communities for two years now. “We lost many lives including those of healthcare workers and it was a sad year for us. We are still learning about Covid-19 but the greatest tool we have at the moment to combat this deadly virus is getting vaccinated,” said Dr Siamuchembu. “We are still learning and hopefully it will not be as devastating as this past year,” he added. — @thamamoe