The Chronicle Kumbirayi Christine Alfayi, Midlands Reporter
A FOUR-YEAR-OLD girl died on the spot after she was hit by a truck as she was trying to cross the road at the 82 km peg along the Gweru-Zvishavane Road. The accident occurred on Thursday at around 6PM in Muzondiwa area. Midlands provincial police spokesperson Inspector Emmanuel Mahoko said Pinduke Lovemore (39) of Riverside, Gweru was driving a Nissan truck along Gweru-Zvishavane road towards Gweru when the accident occurred. “On approaching 82-kilometre peg he hit Tinevimbo Machili aged four who was crossing the road. Machili sustained injuries all over the body and died on the spot,” he said. Insp Mahoko said the matter was reported to the police who attended the scene. “Machili’s body was taken to Zvishavane District Hospital awaiting post-mortem. The vehicle was towed to the Zvishavane Vehicle inspection department for inspection. Police are appealing to drivers to exercise maximum caution and adhere to road traffic regulations when driving. We also urge parents to ensure that children are always accompanied by elders when crossing roads.” In an unrelated incident, Insp Mahoko said police are investigating a highway robbery. A 26-year-old man was robbed of cash and a car along Harare Masvingo Road on Wednesday at around 10PM. “Cosmas Kangirai of Fairfields, Mvuma was hired by five people from Chaka to Chivhu. Upon arrival at the 170-kilometre peg the suspects ordered him to stop the car purporting to have reached their destination,” said Insp Mahoko. He said one of them allegedly grabbed Kangirai by the neck demanding cash while others searched him.
Insp Mahoko said they allegedly tied his hands and legs and took US$360 from him before driving him to Matende Compound, Fairfields, Mvuma. “Kangirai managed to free himself and ran away and the suspects drove away. The matter was reported at Mvuma Police Station who attended the scene. The suspects are still at large,” he said.
Insp Mahoko appealed to members of the public with information that can help identify the suspects who are three males and two females to approach the nearest police station. “The vehicle is a white Toyota Runx registration number ADQ 3872. Once again, we urge drivers to desist from the habit of offering lifts to strangers since some of them will be criminals,” he said.