The Chronicle Thandeka Moyo-Ndlovu, Senior Reporter
TWELVE candidates successfully submitted their documents during the National Assembly Nomination Court for Nkulumane and Pumula Constituencies yesterday with reports that another court may sit for Bulawayo’s Ward 3 whose vacancy was confirmed on Wednesday. Zimbabwe Electoral Commission Presiding Officer who is also the commission’s provincial chief elections officer for Bulawayo, Mr Innocent Ncube said seven candidates submitted their papers in advance with two for Nkulumane constituency and five for Pumula Constituency. He said those who successfully filed nomination papers for the Nkulumane seat are Zanu-PF’s Cde David Ndlovu who is Bulawayo’s former Deputy Mayor, Citizens Coalition for Change’s Mr Kucaca Ivumile Phulu, Mr Gideon Mangena for MDC-A, Mr Gregory Ncube of RPZ and Mr Dumisani Tokwido for the DOP party. For Pumula constituency, nominated candidates include Ms Sichelesile Mahlangu for CCC, Cde Phumulani Nsingo (Zanu-PF), Mr Albert Mhlanga (MDC-A), Mr Ntandoyenkosi Ndlovu (UDA), Mr Stanford Nyoni (RPZ) and Mr Thabani Tshuma who is an independent candidate. Mr Ncube said members of the public who are registered voters are free to go to Tredgold Court and inspect the papers submitted by all candidates tomorrow. “The nomination court started on time and despite power challenges in the morning, we managed to serve everyone who came. For now we await the courts to guide us on what will happen regarding Ward 3 whose nomination did not sit after a court ruling,” said Mr Ncube. Cde Ndlovu said he once served Bulawayo and residents should consider him as he worked hard for the development. “The people know how I served them as councillor and I am sure that I will prevail because the people trust me. I also plan to work twice as hard as during my time as their councillor and deputy mayor,” he said. Mr Phulu said he believes he has a chance to win. Zanu-PF Pumula candidate Cde Nsingo said he was ready to serve and was hoping residents would consider him as he will prioritise the development of Bulawayo. “We are happy that the nomination process went smoothly and now we cannot wait to serve the people of Bulawayo as I am confident that I will win the elections. People of Bulawayo need a servant leader who will take their issues seriously,” he said. Ms Mahlangu said she was however, disappointed by the fact that no woman has come up to contest in the two constituencies. She said it was time women participated in politics as they only can bring about change that will address gender issues within Zimbabwean communities. Meanwhile, Cde Musa Ncube will represent Zanu-PF in the Tsholotsho South constituency by-elections while Mr Leonard Mthombeni will be contesting under Zapu. Cde Ncube had been erroneously reported to belong to Zapu. — @thamamoe