The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Reporter
BEING tasked by the Lord Almighty to fully utilise your calling of preaching and spreading the gospel through music was one of the top priorities that gospel musician Pastor Barak had on his timeline last year. With a congregation that congregates every Sunday at the Ship of Zion International Ministries in Belmont, Pastor Barak saw it fit to use his free time to head to the studio and produce music. Last year, Pastor Barak aka Apostle Siphethangani Sibanda managed to release an album titled Wavuma which was a follow-up to a powerful life experience album called Yimi Lo. From the album sales, he managed to raise funds that continue to feed street kids around the city, donating to Khami Prison, the less privileged and a number of old people’s homes. Pastor Barak also got the opportunity to showcase his art across the Limpopo River where he performed live at Rapha TV, one of the gospel channels in South Africa. At the end of October 2021, that is when the Wavuma album started to knock on almost every radio station and chart shows in the country having received a warm welcome throughout the nation. The songs are still making waves on six gospel chart shows, namely Classic 263, Power FM, Star FM, Khulumani FM, Skyz Metro FM Gospel Top 10 and Skyz Metro FM Top 20 charts. Not only did the album find its feet on the country’s radio stations, but it crossed borders to the regional music industry after landing on Radio Mozambique (96,6 FM). Pastor Barak said he is now working on releasing two videos from the album. “I’m working on releasing two videos for Wavuma and Famba Na Jesu tracks by the end of January. The videos were shot by Corey Productions. I believe that the visuals are going to make an impact, both locally and internationally on TV stations like ZBC, Trace Gospel and 1Gospel. “Having had a great past year, I’m looking forward to another fruitful year,” he said. The artiste is confident that his hit offering Wavuma that was released at the end of year 2021 is yet to do great things. “The way that song is receiving good reception across the country confirms something about this lovely album. It is said that a prophet is not honoured in his own country, but this time, I’ll make sure that this illusion is corrected,” said Pastor Barak. Part of his plans for 2022 includes producing more music that will reach the international market and gospel channels. From working with the late producer Joe Maseko, Pastor Barak is now working with producer K.O.D from “Audio Factory” with instrumentals of his works being done at “Knowledge Studios” in Cape Town, South Africa. – @mthabisi_mthire.