The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
THE Warriors suffered an injury scare when goalkeeper Petros Mhari and attacking midfielder Kudakwashe Mahachi picked up knocks during their training friendly against Sudan on Sunday in a match that ended goalless. The two players, however, have since recovered and were part of the training session yesterday as head coach Norman Mapeza’s charges continue with their preparations for the Africa Cup of Nations where they are set to collide against 2019 losing finalists Senegal on Monday as they begin their campaign. “Petros (Mhari) and Kuda (Mahachi) were injured in the game against Sudan, but they are much better and will be joining the team today for our morning training session,” said Warriors’ team manager Wellington Mpandare. The team was due to depart to their tournament base yesterday just two hours after the arrival of Admiral Muskwe, who was expected to arrive just after lunch. Mpandare said the Sudan match proved that the players’ fitness levels were excellent after using only two substitutes, while their opponents had an incredible 31 players. “The game against Sudan proved that the players are very fit. The Sudan team struggled in terms of fitness, although they had 31 players, while we only used two substitutes. The players have been responding very well to training. They now know what is expected of them in terms of how the coach wants them to play. We expect to fly out to Bafoussam at 3pm today (yesterday),” said Mpandare. Meanwhile, skipper Knowledge Musona joined his colleagues on Tuesday night, while the technical team is still confident that defender Jordan Zemura will be able to fly in as soon as he is cleared. Zemura is in isolation after Covid-19 cases were detected in their team, forcing authorities to place their players into isolation. Retests are expected today. After the opener against Senegal, the Warriors square off against Malawi on January 14 before returning to Yaounde for a date against Guinea to wrap up their Group B campaign. If the Warriors finish top of their group, they will set up a date against third-placed best finishers from either Group A, C or D in the round of 16. Group A has hosts Cameroon, Burkina Faso, Cape Verde and Ethiopia, while Group C has Morocco, Ghana, Gabon and Comoros. Nigeria, Egypt, Sudan and Guinea Bissau make up Group D.