The Chronicle Yvonne Ncube, Showbiz Reporter
“A young girl named Sofia and her mother Miranda lived a peasant life in the kingdom of Enchancia. One day, Sofia’s mother married King Roland II, which led Sofia to become a princess and not just a princess, the first princess.” Do you think this is a little cartoonish? Of course, this turnover only exists in the Disney universe, one could contend. In reality it is expected for Sofia’s story to sound hyperbolic and overblown. But, for Ray Bamala, a 29-year-old street vendor whose life has been revolutionised, a Disney fantasy has become a reality. Since he was a teenager, Bamala always showed great commitment in vending, each and every day was a dedication to sales. Selling chocolates, sweets, biscuits and snacks was his way of generating income. Bamala recalls the days when he used to wake up every morning to sell his stock to the streets. Despite having graduated from Midlands State University with a degree in Music,  Bamala who has always been passionate about art — singing and dancing says he was never bashful about his vending business. He even went above and beyond to make a suit out of Shangani bag material to indicate his line of work and the love he has for it. “The Shangani suit was inspired by my profession. I wanted to tell a story that in life, you need to believe in yourself and be proud of what you do, at the same time motivating others. That Shangani suit to me represents Shangani bags that we vendors use to carry our goods after purchasing them from marketplaces. I used the material so as to portray my profession as a vendor. “The Shangani bag is a representation that things are not easy in the vending profession as it is more of a challenging profession but we never give up. We wake up every day and go back to the streets even if we don’t generate much, but we value hard work,” said Bamala. The vendor said he makes it a point that everything he wears communicates a message to the public. “I designed the suit myself. Basically, all my suits hold a special meaning. Everything that I put on has to convey a message and communicate to the public. I believe in uniqueness and creativity. I believe that as an artiste, I have to inspire society in distinctive ways. For example, the Shangani suit communicated that in life you don’t have to give up, and then there’s an induku that I carried at a certain shoot, it communicated that in life you have to be brave, courageous and fight for what you believe in. So everything that I wear tells a positive story seeking to motivate people,” he said. Last year, Bamala said he came across adverts on social media for the Mr Zimbabwe pageant and he decided to go for it. With no qualification or history in modelling, he said he still went for it and was interestingly appointed Mr Zimbabwe Prince Ambassador, something that he said is a living testimony that one’s line of work does not define their limits. “To be appointed Mr Zimbabwe Prince Ambassador means a lot to me because it was my first time venturing into modelling. I wanted to expand myself, my territories and explore art. This helped me to create connections and also strengthen my brand as Ray Jive Ndlela Bamala. “The best part is that I can now use my story as an example to inspire people to live up to their dreams and not be defined by their backgrounds, for they have no limitations. I have something to show that in life, you are not defined by your situation, you alone can change your life as long as you believe in yourself and as long as you work extra hard. As long as you have determination, as long as you work hard, you can achieve anything,” Bamala said. As part of his reign that started in November last year, Bamala said he will promote charity work and culture, advocate for children’s rights and fight against gender-based violence for as long as he holds the title. Aside from his dedicated profession in vending, Bamala said he is also exploring acting, singing and dance choreography. “As a very ambitious being, I’m also exploring other areas in the realms of the arts which include music, theatre acting, and singing as well as dance choreography. In 2017, I released my first single titled Shanda Mwanangu which can be attributed to encouraging people to work very hard. “I’ve also acted in a gender-based-violence awareness campaign titled I am an African child,” he said. However, Bamala said he will not be leaving the streets anytime soon. “To be quite honest, as much as I wish to leave the streets, I’ll not be quitting vending anytime soon. Vending is my passion and calling. All I can do is upgrade myself in that field. If I can get endorsement deals from big corporate companies, my prayers will be answered,” Bamala said. Be the change that you wish to see in the world. Don’t be pushed around by the fears in your mind. Be led by the dreams in your heart, is what Bamala had to say as his parting shot.