The Chronicle Angela Sibanda, Chronicle Reporter
THE National Blood Service Zimbabwe (NBSZ) has embarked on a drive to collect 300 pints of blood in Victoria Falls by Saturday. Last week, the NBSZ announced that the organisation had been hit by a nationwide shortage of Blood Group O and is now operating with a day’s supply against growing demand as the majority of Zimbabweans are of that blood group. The Victoria Falls community held its first blood drive in 2020 and exceeded its target by 30 percent. That year, NBSZ had a target of 120 pints, but 155 pints were collected and of the 155 pints,80 were type O, 47 type A, 22 group B and six were group AB. This year, the organisation has extended donation days from two to six days, which began on Monday and will end on Saturday in the resort city. In an interview with Chronicle, one of the blood donation drivers Mrs Shannon O’Fee-Kidia said donations will be facilitated in all corners of Victoria Falls. “We are going to be at different venues each day allowing people from the industrial site, high density, low density and town to come through and give blood,” said Mrs  O’Fee-Kidia, who runs a charity, Mummy’s Angel in Victoria Falls. She also said they were grateful for the support that the community has been showing towards the blood donation initiative. “Vic Falls is a very community orientated town and it was no surprise to receive as much, if not more support. This time around, we have also received commitment from two different companies and an individual who will be sponsoring lunch for successful donors on day 1, 2 and 3,” she said. The ongoing blood drive programme started on Monday this week at the Liquor Supplies Warehouse and on Tuesday it was at the Victoria Falls Main Hospital,Wednesday at The Salvation Army Church in Chinotimba. On Thursday the teams will be covering Mkhosana Adventist SDA High School, on Friday at Shoestrings Backpackers, 12 West Drive and on Saturday at the Three Monkeys Restaurant Corner Livingstone Way & Adam Stander Drive .