The Chronicle Mbulelo Mpofu, Showbiz Reporter PRODUCER, Wexey (real name Wesley Tapiwa Siziba) has established what he has termed the Melowex RedRoom, a platform for up-and-coming artistes to showcase their talent through visual performances. The initiative that was established at the beginning of the month comes as a pedestal to step on for new kids on the block to attain exposure. “The Melowex RedRoom is a platform where artistes perform songs, they have recorded on my record label’s YouTube page so as to try and bridge the gap between them and their fans. This is aimed at complementing their audio sound with visuals,” said Wexey who owns the Melowex record label. “I noticed that most up-and-coming artistes I was recording for were struggling to get exposure to the market, especially through audios. To try and assist, I decided to introduce the Melowex RedRoom.” The producer who hails from Bulawayo said he hopes his business model which resembles that of Nash TV will go a long way in helping local up-and-coming artistes reach their target market more efficiently. Wexey said he decided to help since he encountered the same when he ventured into music. He endured a torrid time trying to penetrate an already-concentrated music industry with audios only and establishing such a platform where people would see those behind the music made perfect sense. “This show won’t have boundaries and will cater for all genres be it hip-hop, gospel, jazz, kwaito, dancehall, and a whole lot more so everyone is welcome to join us, “ said Wexey. Season 1 of the Melowex RedRoom has already featured the likes of Zenzele MMM Nkomo, Nomvelo, Bridget G, Mr Kata, Bruceman, Visionariez, T1, Loht Kelso, Bliss, Timz_Red_x, Young Tsodzi, and Troy Larmain. Wexey who released an album last year said this year would be better as he will be on a recruitment drive of gospel artistes. “This year will surely be better as I’ll be signing a lot of gospel artistes under my record label as a way to broaden my experience,” he said. ­­­­­­­- @eMKlass_49