The Chronicle Leonard Ncube , Victoria Falls Reporter
AWARD-winning Victoria Falls-based poet Obert Dube who has been in the industry for more than a decade says 2021 was the best year in his career. Dube said despite the destabilising effects of the Covid-19 pandemic, he showed resilience in his praise poetry which saw him being nominated four times locally and internationally. Of the four nominations, the 2016 Nama winner bagged two. He retained the Pan African Poet of the Year award in Cameroon, after becoming the first Zimbabwean to win it in 2020 and also bagged the Amaqhawanentaba radio award in South Africa. Dube said the highlight of his career last year was an invitation by Kenyan Pan Africanist, professor Patrick Loch Otieno Lumumba to his home in Nairobi, Kenya. Dube had been invited to perform at the All-Africa Youth Conference at Desmond Tutu Conference Centre in Nairobi in November and Prof Lumumba invited him to his house. “The year 2021 was the most successful year in my life as a poet. I was invited by Prof Lumumba to his home in Kenya where I met VVIPs from the continent. There were 16 ministers and other dignitaries from various countries and I was the only ordinary person who had only gotten there through poetry. My spirit was uplifted. “I was also invited to perform at a big stage in Nairobi where all countries were represented. That was the first time for me to perform at such an event and I got a standing ovation. It was last year again when I was invited by organisers of the South African Traditional Music Achievement Awards founder to perform at the awards ceremony. All this is great honour for me,” said Dube. Last year, he wrote a novel titled Lupane and it was nominated for the Bulawayo Arts Awards although it did not win. “I was nominated four times in 2021 and won two of them, which is pass mark for me,” said the praise poet popularly known as Futhi Nikisi or 41, derived from Lupane district’s registration number. Going into 2022, Dube said his resolutions include collaborating with other artistes to widen his fan base. “I don’t usually count unhatched eggs as chicks, but my goal is to collaborate and work with other artistes,” he said. He has already collaborated with internet sensation, comedian Mdawini (real name Hidden Sam Sibanda) who trended last week after his jokes about how landlords abuse tenants did not go down well with some people. The duo has recorded four video clips that are circulating on social media platforms. They are in partnership with Rejoice Dlamini and actor Mahlalela. – @ncubeleon.