The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Sports Reporter FORMER Zimbabwe captain Brendan Taylor has been banned from all forms of cricket for three and a half years after he pleaded guilty to breaching four International Cricket Council (ICC) Anti-Corruption Code and one charge of the ICC Anti-Doping Code. The ICC also revealed that Taylor tested positive for cocaine in his last match for Zimbabwe in Ireland. “His violation under the ICC Anti-Doping Code, which is separate and independent of the anti-corruption charges, resulted from an in-competition test conducted on 8 September 2021 following Zimbabwe’s match against Ireland.  Mr Taylor tested positive for the stimulant Benzoylecognine, a cocaine metabolite, which is specified as a substance of abuse under the Code,” read the statement. He also admitted to breaching: “1. Article 2.4.2 – Failing to disclose (without unnecessary delay) the receipt of any gift, payment, hospitality or other benefit that (a) the participant knew or should have known was given to them to procure a breach of the Code or (b) that was made or given in circumstances that could bring the participant or the sport of cricket into disrepute. “2. Article 2.4.3 – Failing to disclose to the ACU (without unnecessary delay) receipt of gifts/hospitality with a value of US$750 or more regardless of the circumstances in which they were given. “3. Article 2.4.4 – Failing to disclose to the ACU (without unnecessary delay) full details of the approach received to engage in corrupt conduct under the Code including in relation to Zimbabwe’s then upcoming series against Sri Lanka and/or Bangladesh. “4. Article 2.4.7 – obstructing or delaying an ACU investigation, including concealing, tampering with or destroying any documentation or other information that may be relevant to that investigation and / or that may be evidence of or may lead to the discovery of evidence of corrupt conduct under the ICC Anti-Corruption Code.” Alex Marshall, the ICC general manager of the Integrity Unit said: “Brendan is a former international captain who represented Zimbabwe for 17 years. Over such a long career, he participated in numerous anti-corruption and anti-doping education sessions and knew exactly what his obligations were under the ICC Anti-Corruption and Anti-Doping Codes. “It is disappointing that a player of his experience chose not to fulfil those obligations, however he has accepted all charges, which has been reflected in the sanction. I would echo Brendan’s message to other players to report approaches as soon as they happen so any corrupt activity can be disrupted at the earliest possible opportunity. We wish Brendan well in his rehabilitation.”    