The Chronicle Mkhululi Ncube, Showbiz Reporter
FORMER Mokis Connection lead guitarist Rodgers “Chisero” Khuphe has released a single titled Angisomuntu Wokubulawa that introduces him to the front line of Rhumba music, after years of being the proverbial “man behind the scene”. Chisero who has demonstrated his guitar playing skills for a number of bands including Allen Ndoda, Madalaboy, Khumbulani Skuza, Mr Bones and Tsheba Boys says the single is meant to introduce people to his band The Orchestra Utekelele. He said the track is also meant to stimulate the appetite of Rhumba fans as they await his upcoming album, Ngiyofela Kude Nabo. “This year, I decided that it’s high time I started singing and building a name for myself with my own band. I’ve served the Rhumba music scene for years by assisting others build their names and now, I feel it’s time for me to be my own man,” Chisero said. His debut single in which he shows his versatility by playing all the guitars, features two other Rhumba musicians, Prosper Bafana and Mbuso Mabuza. Chisero said the track which is sung in five languages, Venda, IsiNdebele, Chewa, Shona and English is available on online platforms. “I sang in many languages because I wanted to appeal to various people who speak different languages and also bring something new to our beat. The track talks about an evil person who makes life difficult for people by fighting them using various means to prevent them from reaching their goals,” said Chisero while adding that he is working on an album that will also have a flare of many languages and different music beats. With this single, Chisero showed his experience and gave hope that there is still space for talented and original artists to enter the scene. While he is a master of the lead guitar, fans will love his bass-playing skills on the song and the interlinking of various languages. The timing of the release of the single could be a masterstroke on his part as most Rhumba artists released their music last month ahead of the just-ended festive season meaning he has the fans’ attention.  — @themkhust