The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Chronicle Reporter 
A TRUCK rammed head on into a Zupco bus in Bulawayo, killing one person and injuring six others in a freak accident on Wednesday night. The driver of the truck Justin Magodi (42) died on the spot while two passengers in his truck and four others in the bus were injured and rushed to Mpilo Central Hospital. The head-on collision occurred at around 8.50PM, at the traffic light-controlled intersection of Siyephambili Drive and Luveve Road. At the scene, there was a traffic jam, where some motorists got out of their vehicles to have a look at what was happening. A street light was destroyed in the accident. Police and ambulance crews were at the scene attending to the injured and taking statements from passengers who had alighted from the bus. Bulawayo police spokesperson, Inspector Abednico Ncube said the truck turned in front of the bus causing the head on collision. “The road was clear and the truck wanted to turn right into Siyephambili Drive. He did that in front of the bus and it resulted in the head on collision. The driver of the truck died on the spot and he had two other passengers in the truck who were injured. From the bus, four passengers were injured and were all rushed to Mpilo Central Hospital. The bus driver escaped unhurt,” said Insp Ncube. He urged motorists to be more careful on the roads. “People should apply themselves fully when they are behind the steering wheel. “A moving vehicle is very dangerous. So people should consider other road users. This accident was totally avoidable,” said Insp Ncube. This is the second accident in a week involving a Zupco bus, after one ploughed into a crowd in Bulawayo city centre on Monday evening, killing one and injuring four others. According to police, the driver, Mr Raphael Moyo, claims that the brakes of his vehicle failed. The accident occurred just outside the Government Dental Clinic, along Herbert Chitepo Street, between 10th and 11th avenues at around 5PM. Witnesses said the driver, was speeding and tried to avoid another bus before hitting a pole.