The Chronicle Michael Magoronga, Midlands Correspondent
POLICE in the Midlands province have embarked on an initiative to engage traditional leaders and community members as part of measures to fight crime. The engagement is part of a number of initiatives being undertaken by the Zimbabwe Republic Police (ZRP) to fight crime in the wake of a sharp increase in cases of armed robberies, murder among others. The Midlands province is endowed with a number of minerals and illegal mining especially of gold, is rife. In mining communities, crimes such as murder, assault, and thefts are on the rise. Child marriages and teen pregnancies are also on the increase in mining communities as gold panners lure under-aged girls with money. Police hope that the initiative to engage traditional leaders and other community will strengthen crime fighting partnerships and activities throughout this year. Midlands Police Spokesperson, Inspector Emmanuel Mahoko said the community policing project is set to empower communities to fight crime. “The ZRP Midlands is rolling a number of activities in a philosophy known as community policing. The objective is to involve the public in policing their communities through all ways possible,” said Insp Mahoko. A number of meetings with traditional leaders, business community and the community at large have been lined up across the province. “We have lined up a number of meetings in Shurugwi, Zhombe, Shurugwi and Mberengwa among other places. Chiefs, headmen, church leaders, business and other respected people in society are being approached to help in rendering wisdom and support in eradicating all forms of criminality in their communities.” Insp Mahoko said crime was a hindrance to President Mnangagwa’s vision of attaining an upper middle-income economy by 2030. “The Zimbabwe Government has an ambitious target of growing the economy and attaining an upper middle-income status by year 2030. This cannot be achieved when there are high crime levels. Crime affects and deters investment.” Insp Mahoko said it is the duty of everyone to fight crime. “We call upon everyone to join hands in ridding our communities and the nation at large of crimes: robbery, murder, unlawful entry and thefts. In this concept we are urging that all suspected to be committing crimes must be reported to the police,” he said. “This is the beginning and we hope to strengthen crime fighting partnerships and activities throughout the year 2022.”