The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
FOLLOWING a heartbreaking unsuccessful hunt for the Lions of Teranga, the Warriors are  dusting themselves up to focus on their next Afcon finals group encounter against Malawi on Friday. Monday’s 0-1 defeat to Senegal means a win in the opening group match in the Afcon finals continues to elude the Warriors in five appearances at the continental football extravaganza. A 2-2 draw against current African champions Algeria in 2017 remains the best result the Warriors have recorded in the tournament. Zimbabwe looked well on course to earning a point against Senegal on Monday, but with less than 20 seconds of additional time left, they conceded a penalty when a diving Kelvin Madzongwe handled in the box. Zimbabwe’s players protested against the referee’s decision, but replays and the video assistant referee (VAR) showed that the midfielder had blocked a goal bound shot with his elbow. It was a case of so near yet so far for the Warriors, who had up to that point put up a gallant fight. A draw would have been a fair result for the Warriors and given them belief that they can make it beyond the group stages for the first time in their history. The Warriors’ next opponents Malawi also lost their opening game 1-0 to Guinea. Zimbabwe have never won their second group game in the tournament, and if history is to repeat itself, then their group stage jinx looks set to stretch. But they are not worried about past tournament statistics and their focus is on the Malawi game. Head-to-head statistics between the two nations favour Zimbabwe, who have won seven of their last 12 meetings, lost twice and drawn three times. The last time Zimbabwe lost to Malawi was in an Afcon qualifier on October 7, 2006, when they fell 1-0. They last faced off in last year’s Cosafa Cup where they drew 2-2. Head coach Norman Mapeza wants his charges to put behind their disappointment against Senegal and fight to the final whistle of the tournament. “Look, the guys did very well yesterday (Monday) and what is important now is to focus on the Malawi match. From my observation, I think defensively we looked very much organised, the midfield wasn’t that bad, but I think we were supposed to do more in the final third in terms of creativity. “Coming to the Malawi match, I don’t think we really need to focus much on one department because football requires a collective effort. So, we need to make sure we work on all departments, but mainly, it will be to do with our finishing and movement, especially in the final third,” said Mapeza. He understands the heartbreak fans suffered when Zimbabwe conceded the last-minute goal against Senegal. “To all our fans, I know they are disappointed because of the result. We’re in this together. We’re all disappointed because losing a football game with 20 seconds to play is very painful. We won’t give up until it’s over. I’ll always appreciate their support.” – @ZililoR