The Chronicle Botswana’s President Mokgweetsi Masisi is in mandatory self- isolation after testing positive for Covid-19 in routine testing, a government spokesperson said yesterday. “The president does not have any symptoms and will continue to receive close medical monitoring by his medical doctors,” John-Thomas Dipowe, acting permanent secretary for Government Communications, said in a statement. Vice President Slumber Tsogwane will assume the president’s responsibilities until further notice while Masisi is in isolation, Dipowe said. New coronavirus infections have risen sharply in the diamond-rich Southern African country since the detection of the Omicron variant late last year, to an average of 2 500 every three days from under 300 over the same period before Omicron. But health officials say hospitalisations have not spiked. Botswana has managed to fully vaccinate 71% of its eligible population of around 1.3 million people. Health officials said on December 29 that Botswana would start to administer booster doses while the age limit for vaccination was reduced to 12 years from 18 years. Meanwhile, US Defence Secretary Lloyd Austin said he tested positive for Covid-19 on Sunday with mild symptoms and would attend meetings virtually as he quarantined at home for the next five days. News of Austin’s positive test comes after the Pentagon last week tightened restrictions at its headquarters over concern about the highly transmissible Omicron variant that has led to a sharp increase in Covid-19 infections throughout the world. The military is faced with the challenge of maintaining military readiness for troops, often in close quarters on ships and planes. Austin, who is fully vaccinated and received a booster in early October, said in a statement he last met President Joe Biden on December 21, more than a week before he started experiencing symptoms. “As my doctor made clear to me, my fully vaccinated status — and the booster I received in early October — have rendered the infection much more mild than it would otherwise have been,” Austin added. Austin said he requested a test earlier on Sunday after having symptoms while at home on vacation. He was last at the Pentagon on Thursday. Austin is one of the most senior members of President Joe Biden’s administration to test positive for Covid-19. In October, Homeland Security Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas tested positive for the virus. Austin said he planned to attend meetings virtually when possible and he would retain all authorities in running the Defence Department and overseeing military activities around the world. His deputy, Kathleen Hicks, would represent him in some matters, he added.–Reuters.