The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili, Chronicle Reporter
THE Bulawayo City Council (BCC) is considering introducing polymer stabilisers in the construction of cost effective and durable roads in line with latest engineering solutions. This comes at a time when 70 percent of the city’s roads have outlived their lifespan, with most of them in a dilapidated state. The rains recorded in the past weeks have left the city’s roads littered with potholes, making them difficult to navigate. Even some recently rehabilitated roads have not been spared. Government last year implemented the Emergency Road Rehabilitation Programme 2 (ERRP2) as part of its efforts to rehabilitate damaged roads. Government is also set to rehabilitate 10 critical roads in Bulawayo under the extended ERRP2, building on the momentum started last year to upgrade key infrastructure. Under the ERRP 2 programme, roads in Bulawayo such as Siyephambili Drive, George Avenue and 23rd Avenue have been rehabilitated and are currently in a good state. In latest council minutes released last week, BCC revealed that it is considering adopting new ways in road maintenance. “The director of engineering services reported (9th December, 2021) that the department was currently considering various polymer stabilisers (or emulsion) available in the market that provided engineering solutions for the road construction industry. These stabilisers were used for: soil stabilisation, road seals, road maintenance, dust suppression, structural waterproofing and capitalisation of waste materials,” reads the minutes. Council also revealed that it was already in touch with industry players on the possibility of partnerships in introducing the trendy road maintenance technologies “The department had been in communication with various companies that had shown interest in using these polymer stabilisers on the city’s road network and was considering using these on gravel roads on trial basis. Benefits of polymer stabilisers included reduced construction cost, reduced construction period, good resistance to corrosion and deterioration, resistance to water penetration and resistance to damage from seasonal changes. “The stabilisers were economically advantageous and they appeared to meet the city’s requirements and needs. The department intended to engage two or three suppliers/contractors through the Expression of Interest mechanism early next year.” –  @nqotshili