The Chronicle Thandeka Moyo Ndlovu, Senior Health Reporter
ZIMBABWEANS have been commended for continued uptake of the Covid-19 vaccines with reports showing that at least 29 000 people have received their booster shots. National Covid-19 coordinator Dr Agnes Mahomva said vaccination figures for all three doses being offered in the country improved during the past week, a sign that the country is in the right direction. To date, 4 209 724 people have received their first jabs while 3 235 083 have received their second doses. As of Monday, Zimbabwe had 226 460 confirmed cases, including 208 112 recoveries and 5 258 deaths. In an interview with Zimpapers Television Network, Dr Mahomva urged members of the public to take the vaccination drive seriously to avert deaths and new infections. “We are happy that our figures are improving, especially the past week, we have been seeing a rise in the number of people who are coming to get vaccinated. All we need is a high level of coverage to achieve herd immunity and we call upon the community to take this programme seriously as it is lifesaving,” said Dr Mahomva. Parliamentary portfolio committee on Health Chairperson Dr Ruth Labode said she was impressed by the pace at which members of the public were getting vaccinated. “I tried getting my booster jab recently only to find that most health facilities had people who were getting their first and second jabs of the vaccines. I was impressed and we recommend private players to complement the Government’s efforts to ensure that we vaccinate a majority of our people and achieve herd immunity,” she said. “We have lost quite a number of people and we should be vigilant in adhering to recommended prevention measures and getting vaccinated.” China last week donated another 10 million doses of Covid-19 vaccines, bringing its gifts to 12 million doses, and ensuring that with its own purchases Zimbabwe now has access to adequate stocks to give the unvaccinated their two shots each and make major inroads into giving the booster shots. –@thamamoe