The Chronicle Patrick Chitumba, Midlands Bureau Chief
GWERU City Council (GCC) councillors are expected to elect a new mayor today, a month after the incumbent Councillor Josiah Makombe was recalled by the Movement for Democratic Change (MDC-T)-led by Mr Douglas Mwonzora. Councillors are expected to choose one from among themselves at 10AM to be the new mayor for the city. The new mayor is expected to lead until the general elections in 2023. Former Mayor of Gweru Clr Hamutendi Kombayi (Ward 1), Clr Edson Kurebgaseka (Ward 9) and Clr John Manyundwa (Ward 18) are said to be eyeing the post. GCC Acting Town Clerk Mr Vakayi Douglas Chikwekwe confirmed that a new mayor would be chosen today. “Tomorrow (today) at 10AM at the town house, councillors are electing a new mayor of the city,” he said. Clr Makombe was recalled on December 10 after he pledged loyalty to MDC-Alliance leader Mr Nelson Chamisa. Clr Makombe is the current president of the Urban Councils Association of Zimbabwe (Ucaz) In a statement yesterday, Clr Makombe said it was with a heavy heart that he was leaving both posts. “The recall was done on the 10th of December 2021. The reason for the recall is that I am a member of MDC-A led by advocate Chamisa. I want to take this opportunity to thank all residents of Ward 2. You trusted and gave me the opportunity to serve you as your councillor as well as the mayor of our city. I would also like to thank all the residents and stakeholders of Gweru for giving me the opportunity and support during my tenure as your mayor,” he said. “I am happy that I was given this very rare opportunity to contribute in a great way in the development of our city. My mandate was to provide quality service delivery to my community of Gweru and I did my best. I promised zero tolerance to corruption at Gweru City Council and I did my best to deal with that. I promised to deal with the water crisis in our city, measures and mechanisms were put in place by enhancing our pumping capacity at Gwenhoro and Whitewaters. We still have water challenges but the necessary equipment to deal with the problem was secured and hopefully the implementation will be done with speed.” Under the leadership of Clr Makombe, GCC which has been struggling with resources, created the Gweru City Parking company which has brought order to the Central Business District. Within its first six months of operation, council has procured a backhoe loader using revenue from Gweru City Parking. “I also spearheaded the reconstruction of Kudzanayi Long Distance Bus Rank, the first of its kind in Zimbabwe. Your city is now realising revenue that was never available before. There are still some projects that are under construction, the Wimpy rank, the Kombayi fresh produce market as well as the Mtapa Market. I hope all these projects will be completed for the benefit of Gweru. I had also started the upgrading of our airdrome into a fully-fledged airport. Gweru being at the centre of our country we definitely need an airport, hence the preparations to have one. As planned, work should start next year with the investor that we partnered,” said Clr Makombe. He said he will not discuss the issue of his recalling since it still hurts.