The Chronicle Midlands Reporter
A firm that entered into a parking partnership with Gweru City Council has commissioned a brand-new towing truck and yard to keep impounded vehicles as it moves to intensify its operations in Gweru and make more revenue. City Parking entered into a private public partnership with Gweru City Council which is paying dividends as already the latter has bought a brand-new backhoe loader from its $14 million share from parking fees. The local authority introduced the parking system some five years ago but due to the old and manual way of operations and alleged corruption from some employees in that department — council failed to make any profit. Council then did some feasibility studies which revealed that leasing the parking department to a private entity would help council double its revenue collection which is already happening. Yesterday, Gweru deputy mayor Councillor Cleopas Shiri, management led by Mr Vakayi Douglas Chikwekwe together with representatives from City Parking commissioned a brand-new tow truck and impound yard that has a carrying capacity of 100 vehicles. In his brief remarks, Clr Shiri welcomed the equipment adding that the partnership was now turning into a money-making venture for the city. “We are proud to be here, proud that this partnership is going to improve revenue collection. As you know, revenue collected from this public private partnership will help improve service delivery for our residents,” he said. City Parking charges US$1 parking an hour or equivalent in local currency. Towing fines have been pegged at US$90 which can also be paid using local currency at the prevailing interbank rate. Dr Percy Toriro, board chairman for City Parking said they were happy with the partnership with the City of Gweru. He said the new truck and the impound yard will help increase revenue inflows for the local authority. “We aim to increase revenue collection for Gweru City Council and this partnership will also produce more employment opportunities for the locals. Motorists are encouraged to adhere to the city’s by-laws in line with parking,” said Dr Toriro. Suspended Gweru Mayor Clr Josiah Makombe once told this publication that there was a lot of corrupt and underhand dealings in the then city’s parking department hence the decision to give it to a private entity to run. The parking department was even failing to raise enough money to pay workers in that department. “There has been a lot of rot within the council’s parking department. “Imagine the department failing to raise enough money to pay workers yet we have more cars that park in the city everyday than the number of ratepayers in Gweru,” he said.