The Chronicle Mkhululi Ncube, Chronicle Reporter 
THE family of the late national hero Cde Simon Khaya Moyo is deliberating on how best to keep the legacy of the nationalist alive. He died in November last year and was buried at the National Heroes’ Acre in Harare. His widow, Mrs Margaret Moyo told the Bulawayo Press Club yesterday: “Ubaba usanda ukusitshiya and his children are outside the country. There is something we are discussing and that will be unveiled during his memorial service to be held sometime in the future.” The media briefing was also addressed by Zanu-PF Politburo member Retired Colonel Tshinga Dube who was also a friend to the late national hero. He said Cde Khaya Moyo played a crucial role in the development of the country and was among the key people who negotiated the Unity Accord of 22 December 1987. “SK was involved in the unity talks to try and address the wrongs which led to the death of many people. He was involved heavily in those talks but unfortunately among those who were involved in those talks from the two parties, most have died and we are left with Cde Angeline Masuku,” he said. Rtd Col Dube said after the death of former Vice President John Landa Nkomo, former PF-Zapu members chose Cde Khaya Moyo to take over as vice president. He said despite that failing to materialise, Cde Khaya Moyo continued working for the development of the nation. “All former Zapu leaders met under the chairmanship of Cde Msipa and we unanimously agreed to choose Cde SK Moyo. It was an obvious choice for all of us for him to be the vice president. We thought it was a done deal but unfortunately when I thought the Unity Accord was beginning to shape up, we were all shocked at the Congress that the candidate we had selected was thrown away and the candidate that we did not know how he came in was put in,” said Rtd Col Dube. “So, SK, although he was already satisfied that he will be the vice president, he together with the rest of us were shocked at the development but he continued working very hard in all the assignments he was given.”