The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Reporter
MUSIC producer and radio personality Cooperman and man of the moment, Fab G Umshana kaGogo are certainly putting the city on the map through their latest offering. The duo recently released visuals for the song Mpalakazi which has set tongues wagging among many music lovers. Listening to the track, one is touched by the message laced on the great production. The inspirational song encourages people to avoid being irresponsible through lack of proper planning and prioritising certain things. The quality visuals showcase the beauty of the country’s cultural hub, Bulawayo, as the scenes were shot in Old Magwegwe, New Magwegwe and Nkulumane (Balcony). In an interview, tribal house artiste Fab G Umshana kaGogo, who is in Harare for collaboration with Herman and possibly another with Jah Signal said fans should look out for him as he will be releasing his debut album. A couple of singles are set to be rolled out during the course of the year. “The year 2021 ended very well for me and there’re a lot of expectations for 2022. As we speak, I’m in Harare working on some productions that I’m confident will be bangers. For now, people should look out for my debut album titled Emhlabeni. “I’m ready to put in the work this year, evidenced by the release of Mpalakazi. The visuals for Thatha Mi are also set to be released soon,” Umshana kaGogo said. “In Harare, I’m working on a collaboration with the young talented artiste, Herman. If everything goes well, we’ll also pull a big feature with Jah Signal,” he said. Bambelela, a song that Umshana kaGogo worked on with Madlela Skhobokhobo, Ngizokulinda featuring Qeqeshiwe and Ijumo featuring Awa Khiwe are some of the singles that will be dropped as the year progresses. “Before the year ends, a big collaboration with a South African artiste will have been released as we’re working on it now,” he added. According to the artiste, consistency has seen him do well in the industry. “From Amafufu to Nomvula and Thatha Mi, I’ve been very consistent with my works. However, I feel like people slept on Amafufu so I’m doing a remix to revive it and give it the punch it deserves.” The determined artiste whose music has its own genre that he coined Umthobanhliziyo Tribal House said he is also working on a television series called Emhlabeni. To ensure his genre does not die, he is grooming other artistes who include his daughter. “The legacy of Umthobanhliziyo Tribal House has seen two artistes including my five-year-old daughter Lilo Masetshana join. Her love for art is unmatched as she hit the studio at the age of three. “She’s working on her debut single that’s also expected to drop later this year. The second artiste is a 20-year-old girl by the name Nicky whose debut single is set to drop on Valentine’s Day,” he said. Fab G UmshanakaGogo said for him, music is not just about entertainment, but history in the making. “2022 I’m going all out as I’m giving the last piece of me. This has to be my year and by the look of things, this is the rise of Fab G Umshana kaGogo, the founder of Umthobanhliziyo Tribal House,” said a confident Umshana kaGogo. On the other hand, Cooperman a Skyz Metro FM presenter said the plan this year is to open avenues for more artistes. “The goal is to open doors for as many up-and-coming artistes. On Skyz Metro FM, I have a platform called Underground Gossip which profiles unsigned artistes and introduces them to a different market which is the radio clientele. “Soon I’ll be profiling DJs and music producers so that I introduce them to a different market and help them build their brands,” said Cooperman. — @mthabisi_mthire