The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Chronicle Reporter 
THE late prominent Bulawayo businesswoman and owner of Sis Bee’s Kitchen, Ms Beauty Mpofu, was given a grand send-off yesterday, with different speakers describing her as a unique role model whose life deserves to be celebrated. ‘‘Sis Bee’’ was a well-known woman in business as her restaurants served traditional foods, which many people loved. She died at the age of 67 at Mater Dei Hospital last week on Friday from renal failure. Her burial service was held at the Bulawayo Amphitheatre where scores of people gathered to bid farewell to one of the city’s distinguished entrepreneurs. Sis Bee’s body was placed in a Doves Funeral Service Mercedes Benz Pilato Hearse with personalised plates and was taken to Lady Stanley Cemetery, her final resting place at around 1PM. Her funeral service was attended by, among other dignitaries, Minister of Bulawayo Provincial Affairs and Devolution, Judith Ncube, Minister of Small to Medium Enterprises, Dr Sithembiso Nyoni, Deputy Minister of Industry and Trade Raj Modi, Deputy Mayor Councillor Mlandu Ncube, industrialist Mr Busisa Moyo, ZTA regional head Mrs Novuyo Mathonsi, ZITF deputy CEO Ms Stella Nkomo, Harvest House International Church leader, Dr Prophet Sarah Nyathi, and Eagle Life Assembly Church (which Sis Bee attended) Dr Prophet Blessing Chiza. Speaker after speaker lauded Sis Bee for her motherly love, business acumen and attention to detail that made her a cut above the rest. In her keynote speech, Minister Ncube said the traditional food industry originated in Bulawayo from Sis Bee and people from other parts of the country copied the business model from her. “We approached the executive mayor, Siwela, at that time and we asked on behalf of women that we have a dream. Remember that the City of Bulawayo was very strict and the health department would inspect schools to see if they were in compliance to maintain certain standards,” she said. “After the presentation, the mayor called the town clerk, Ndubiwa and the director of housing Magagula and the city doctor. We were then taken to South Africa with other women to see how mobile kitchens are being run and SMEs.” Minister Ncube said Sis Bee had to be an intern at a local hotel so that she could further her career. “People used to be arrested because of selling food on the streets from cars or from their homes. Sis Bee and I went back to the city council and he went to the Rainbow Hotel, or Southern Sun at the time and told them that there were women who were interested in catering,” she recalled. “They were then attached so that they could master their skills in food, housekeeping and serving people.” Dr Nyoni said Sis Bee showed the hallmarks of a businessperson as she grew and taught her family how the business is run for legacy. “Sis Bee was an entrepreneur. She had a talent that she was born with and turned it into a business. She was good at cooking and catering and turned that into a business and now it is a corporate,” said the minister. “This is a new and sustainable model where parents build and grow the business with their children and when they retire or die, they leave the business being run by the children. From here grow this business, start networking strong and have value chains.” Minister Nyoni challenged the Bulawayo City and the Minister of State to allocate a farm for the children so that they can grow the food that they cook. She also said there was a need to give Sis Bee’s children a tourism site so that they can internationally market themselves. Her son, Mr Alile Yusufu said his mother touched the lives of anyone she met and for that he preferred to celebrate her life. “Today I’m not mourning, but I’m celebrating the life of my mother, who I believe is a champion not only in the family, but in the community at large,” he said. “Wherever she went she touched lives and she had that aura where she would make an impact wherever she went. I’m not mourning, there are no tears that will come out of my eyes, but I’m celebrating a life well-lived.” Mr Yusufu said he has been with his mother in the business journey for 22 years and Sis Bee’s Kitchen will continue. “Most people have been sending me messages saying, may you carry the legacy of Sis Bee, both as an individual and as a brand. I’d like to say that we aren’t carrying a legacy,” he said. “Because I believe a legacy is an inheritance, I’m not after an inheritance, but a vision, a vision that my mother carried throughout her life.” Prominent caterer and owner of M&M Joyous Events, Mrs Eunice Dlamini said she was Sis Bee’s understudy and she learnt a lot. “Sis Bee was a beautiful woman inside and out and she taught me a lot of things during my interactions with her. She walked me through catering and she was very strict and thorough and was a no-nonsense woman. Sis Bee was not competing with anyone, she knew she had a brand, which was above all brands,” said Mrs Dlamini, who travelled to the Football World Cup in 2010 in South Africa to cook for visitors there. She said Sis Bee handpicked her to travel with her to the World Cup, where her stand had long queues. “My CV is decorated because of Sis Bee. We cooked amacimbi there. She could have gone alone to South Africa, but she followed the adage that says, if you want to walk fast walk alone, but if you want to walk far, walk with others. After excelling at the World Cup, we travelled to cater at the Swaziland International Trade Fair and during the Reed Dance,” said Mrs Dlamini. ZITF deputy boss Ms Nkomo said Sis Bee was an inspiration to all young businesswomen who wanted to grow and excel. “I personally admired Sis Bee for her business acumen, ingenuity and that sheer determination to make it in life. She turned our traditional meals into a delicacy, a cuisine and got her acclaim all over the country and beyond,” said Ms Nkomo. “In 2011 after the World Cup she approached us and pitched the idea of Sis Bee’s serving point at ZITF. We were at first sceptical and after accepting her proposal, and for the past 10 years, her menu and her outlet is one of the most favourable places at the ZITF.” Business executive Mr Busisa Moyo said Sis Bee was an innovator. “She inspired and she continues to be an inspiration to us. Sis Bee was bold and brave, as she popularised traditional cuisine against the concept of takeaways,” he said. “Who would have thought that in a suit and tie one would eat amasi during lunch and go back to the office? We didn’t know that but Sis Bee showed us that your traditional food is very much compatible with our urban life? She was an innovator,” said Mr Moyo. Mrs Mathonsi said as the organisation they wanted Sis Bee’s to flourish. “To the children we say continue doing the good administrative work that you were doing when she was still with us. Your role has trebled and ZTA will wish to see this flourishing as I believe that this was Sis Bee’s desire,” she said. In his sermon, Prophet Chiza spoke about the last moments of Sis Bee, describing her as a believer who held on to the Lord until her last breath. He said she was very much involved in his church and urged those in the auditorium to repent.