The Chronicle 2 Timothy 1:7
“For God hath not given us the spirit of fear; but of power, and of love, and of a sound mind.” DAVID was not a coward, he challenged Goliath and I believe he was tired of Goliath terrorising his people and the day he challenged him he was carrying an anointing to destroy giants. I heard a story of a man whose toes were stepped on by a huge muscular man and this man was very angry and looked up to confront whoever had stepped on his toes, but when he looked up and saw how big the man was he said “I am sorry I just wanted to let you know that I am the one who put my foot under yours” (hilarious) We must not be Christians who are apologetic, who apologise to the devil when we are attacking him, because the anointing that God empowers His children with is an anointing that deals with the devil himself. The Bible says we have been given authority over all the power of the enemy, over his serpents and scorpions, to tread on them under our feet, but nothing shall hurt us. You cannot apologetically deal with demons, you must move in a certain anointing that has no excuse in the mighty name of Jesus. If you are attacked today, go back and fight again tomorrow because you have an anointing of power, certain demonic levels are not easily dealt with. There are certain areas where you need to be anointed like dealing with generational curses, bloodline cycles, bloodline covenants, spirit of death among many others. You need the type of anointing called, “an anointing of a mad man,” to deal with such situations. Whenever one dealt with Jezebel, she would paint her face to show you another side of her as she looked through the window, it was a sign that she was going to get you. She was a woman looking for opportunities but the anointing that was on Jehu, was an anointing to deal with a mad woman, a woman that is evil and two-faced. Always stay spiritually vigilant because whenever you are going towards a “Jezebel” she sends people to come and challenge your vision, to challenge your purpose but you must always remember that you were anointed with a box of oil. God Bless! eaglelifeassembly@yahoo.com