The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
BINGA High School headmaster Mr Land Siansole Kabome has been appointed the substantive District Development Coordinator (DDC) for Binga in Matabeleland North. Mr Kabome (51)’s appointment is with effect from January 1. His vision is to spearhead development of the whole district through implementation of the Second Republic’s National Development Strategy (NDS1) as the country moves towards an upper middle-income economy by 2030. Mr Farai Marinyane had been acting Binga DDC since January 2020 following the transfer of Mrs Lydia Banda-Ndethi to the post of deputy director local governance in Matabeleland North in the office of the Secretary for Provincial Affairs and Devolution. Matabeleland North Minister of State for Provincial Affairs and Devolution Richard Moyo confirmed Mr Kabome’s appointment saying this will go a long way in the development of the district. “We are happy to have a substantive DDC for Binga. The district had gone for a long time with an acting DDC but following my request, the Second Republic has appointed a person who knows the system and values of Government which we hope will help change the face of Binga. We will work with him and we expect him to lead the Government agenda in Binga,” said Minister Moyo. A holder of a teacher training diploma from Chinhoyi Technical Teachers’ College and a BCom Honours in Economics from Midlands State University, Mr Kabome was headmaster for Sianzyundu Secondary School in Binga between 2010 and 2017 when he was transferred to Binga High with a mandate to improve the school’s pass rate and infrastructure. When he got to Binga High in 2017, the pass rate was at 21 percent at Ordinary Level and he raised it to 37 percent. He spearheaded the refurbishment of the school with all classroom blocks now having floor tiles among other developments. He was still Binga High head when his appointment was made by the Ministry of Local Government and Public Works on Friday last week. “The appointment is with effect from 1 January 2022 and we are looking at the whole district. We have outstanding projects such as the border post and Registry Office which we want completed so that we show a good image of the Second Republic,” said Mr Kabome. He said other projects include implementation of the Bulawayo Kraal Irrigation Scheme, rehabilitation of the road network especially in remote parts of the district such as Mujeri and Siabuwa and development of water infrastructure such as boreholes as well as health facilities across the district. Mr Kabome believes in teamwork and said he will work closely with all stakeholders especially line Ministries. “We want to solicit for views of everyone in the district so that we know what people want done. This is a good challenge for me. I am not really new to local governance as I once served as a commissioner for Binga Rural District Council following dissolution of councils ahead of the 2018 harmonised elections. “We will be working with line Ministries and traditional leaders especially village heads and chiefs so that we fully utilise the ward assembly,” he said. Binga is one of Matabeleland North’s seven districts and has 25 wards and 17 chiefs making it one of the biggest districts in the country. Mr Kabome attended Junamina primary in Sianzyundu before going to Kariangwe in the same district and Fatima High in Lupane for Ordinary and Advanced Level. He is a married family man with five children and also a successful farmer who has been consistently delivering between 10 and 20 tonnes of maize to the Grain Marketing Board in Lusulu where he is based. — @ncubeleon