The Chronicle Business Reporter
A CHANGE in mindset is required if Bulawayo is to achieve transformative development and sound business operations in year 2022, economist Mr Kholisani Moyo has said. The revival of industries, creating a smart city with improved service delivery and job creation are some of the top priorities for the second largest city. Government has also pledged to increase its support for Bulawayo, especially towards resuscitating ailing companies and expediting the implementation of the Gwayi-Shangani Dam Project, which is part of the National Zambezi Water Project, seen as the lasting solution to the perennial water shortages. However, the city council and Government cannot achieve it all but all stakeholders have to play their part towards realising desired progress, said Mr Moyo who is also the city’s business development officer. “We all love to get good new year messages and best wishes ahead but when you evaluate what would have been done, be it at macro and micro-level at the end of the year, many people will be having a list of regrets or would have failed to have achieved certain things,” said Mr Moyo. “Challenges will always be there but as we look at how we will deal with issues ahead, perhaps what we need is to focus on those key factors that will give us the positive results. “One of these has largely to do with mindset. At both individual and corporate level there is a need to identify and address those areas that require total mindset change if we are to succeed.” Turning to Bulawayo, Mr Moyo said driving the smart city agenda by 2024 cannot be achieved unless all stakeholders play ball and change their mindsets to assist the transformative drive. Already the council has identified the energy, roads and infrastructure, water and waste water infrastructure, transport, housing, health, agro processing, special economic zones and the Information Communication Technology (ICT) sectors to foster ‘smart city’ projects and investments in line with the City’s investment prospectus. “This vision requires mindset change at different levels. For instance, there is a need for mindset change in how we handle our financial issues. “As we develop our economy, we should not ignore the key aspect of formalisation,” he said. “Our small businesses must change the mindset of viewing formalisation as a negative. They must register their businesses, get tax clearance and pay their bills to the local authority. “This is crucial since 90 percent of our economy is informal. We need a mindset change in appreciating the need to bank our incomes. The financial services sector should also deal with legacy issues that scare away depositors.” Mr Moyo said environmental business modelling was gaining momentum globally given the need for sustainability in view of climate change issues. As such, he said business executives need to change their mindsets regarding environmental responsibility. “Businesses will have to invest more on conservation, embrace renewable energy, recycling and use proper methods of disposing of waste as well as adopt green environment businesses processes to avert pollution. “We need mindset change to achieve these,” he said. Mr Moyo said developing and maintaining the city’s infrastructure was also critical as an enabler for investment attraction. He bemoaned the spate of vandalism of public infrastructure and failure by some businesses to constantly renovate their structures. “Public and private infrastructure has to be maintained and developed. This again requires mindset change. It is worrying that some parts of Bulawayo are getting rusty and businesses are no longer renovating their buildings. “Some of the city’s infrastructure is dilapidated and as we enter into the new year, we want to see a change in this. Citizens need to have mindset change and know that it’s their duty to protect the city’s infrastructure from vandalism as well as paying their bills to support its development.” Mr Moyo also urged businesses to adopt ICTs to enhance business efficiency in line with global trends. He said mindset change was required as some operators are still stuck in manual processes. “We need to leverage on ICTs if we are to become a smart city and this will assist us in many ways in terms of boosting business and enhancing our service delivery,” he said. “In view of Covid-19, adoption of ICTs has to be quickened across board and our businesses and consumers should all embrace digital means of transacting including when paying rates. The manual way of doing things should change now. “Even council applications should be done electronically as well as clinic bookings among other key services by other businesses. This is critical and we cannot ignore it.”