The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Chronicle Reporter
VENDORS and youths in Gwanda, Matabeleland South province have commended Government for setting up sites where they can work from. The Minister of Local Government and Public Works, July Moyo yesterday commissioned a Fruit and Vegetable Market Stall, Waste Collection Centre and the Youth Innovation Hub in Gwanda. He toured the facilities with Matabeleland South Minister of Provincial Affairs and Devolution Abednico Ncube, Gwanda Mayor Councillor Njabulo Siziba and representatives of the United Nations Developmeent Programme, Russian Embassy, service chiefs and senior Government officials. The project is implemented under the Urban Resilience Programme to develop critical infrastructure for the people. The Urban Resilience project is being rolled out in conjunction with the Ministry of Local Government and Public Works, Municipality of Gwanda, UNDP and the Russian Federation. This project contributes to the national vision of an upper middle-income economy by 2030 under the National Development Strategy 1 (NDS1) as it addresses issues of unemployment, clean environment and bridges the digital divide. Vendors at the Fruit and Vegetable Market Stall situated behind the Nssa complex, said the days of playing cat and mouse with municipality authourities are over and they can now sell their wares legally without hindrance. Ms Siphathisiwe Ncube a widow and a mother of three, said she has come out of the streets and now can work freely at the market. “I can now fend for my children without hassles, unlike before. Some women here are single mothers, others are widows and living with disability,” said Ms Ncube. Next to her stall is Ms Ashanti Chisale. “With this market stall I see a future that is bright for us. This is a commendable development for our area,” said Ms Chisale. A businesswoman Ms Previous Dizha said she was once a vendor and had come to support her daughter who had a stall there. She said she wants her daughter to learn that from humble beginnings, something better can be realised. Another vendor Ms Rosemary Takayengwa said she had made great strides in her life and the stall will give her a stable income. “I have built houses, sent my children to school and taken care of my parents. My husband is a vendor selling phones,” she said. At the Youth Innovation Hub, 20-year-old Mr Lebohang Dube said it will help close the digital divide. Speaking at the Youth Innovation Hub, Minister Moyo said the opening of the market space was a way to address the shortage of stalls in Gwanda. “Let me hasten to indicate that the demand for market space in Gwanda is very high, like it is across all urban areas in the country. Currently, I am informed that Gwanda is accommodating almost 500 vendors at designated sites, and this is a very small number compared to the demand. It is hence my hope that while, in a small way, this intervention is very positive in trying to address the shortage of these market spaces,” said Minister Moyo. He challenged local authorities to construct more vending sites so that they become smart cities. “Be that as it may, there is still a long way to go, the Government still challenges the municipality and other local urban authorities to adopt a robust approach in construction of more vending sites so that they become smart cities. It is the Government’s desire to formalise the operations of these so called informal traders so that they can also contribute to the national fiscus,” said Minister Moyo. He said the setting up of the waste management system at Phakama Business Centre would contribute to adding economic value and avoid health hazards. Minister Moyo said the setting up of the innovation hub will address the digital divide which is a critical milestone in Government programming efforts. “The operationalisation of the hub envisages a situation where youths and small enterprises in and around Gwanda acquire ICT skills that facilitate them to participate more in the economy positively. It should be noted that the level of unemployment in Gwanda is very high, this end up perpetuating  crime and drug abuse particularly among the youth,” said Minister Moyo. He said the innovation hub would improve the way of life of the youth and women in Jahunda suburb. In a speech read on her behalf by acting provincial development officer Ms Sipho Maphosa, Minister of Women Affairs, Community, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Dr Sithembiso Nyoni said the construction of the vending site was inline with NDS1 as the informal sector contributes to local economies. “I am happy to inform you that, currently there are two more vending marts which are under construction here in Gwanda town, a project which my ministry is embarking on in partnership with Municipality of Gwanda. It is my desire to see this sector grow, formalise and operating at designated sites that meet Public Health Regulation’s amid Covid-19 pandemic so that they gain recognition in the business community,” said Dr Nyoni. She said if informal traders were organised, financial arms of Government will support them. Dr Nyoni urged Minister Moyo to invest in workspace provision and make it a priority service deliverable to bring sanity in local authorities. She urged beneficiaries to take care of their structures and pay rates to council so that it can maintain them. Minister Ncube? said the project enhances the province’s gross domestic product. “The commissioning of these projects come at a time when the need to enhance our Provincial Gross Domestic Product (GDP) has been accelerated. As a Province we appreciate that SMEs, ICT and Environmental Management are the backbone of our economy. They play critical roles in the achievement of NDS1 goals and the attainment of vision 2030,” said Minister Ncube.? He said the infrastructure will benefit the people of Matabeleland South, particularly the community of Gwanda. “Other districts are therefore encouraged to work towards establishing similar infrastructure and services for the benefit of our province. May I strongly appeal to the beneficiaries of these projects to fully utilise and take good care of these projects so that indirect beneficiaries and the future generation may benefit as well,” said Minister Ncube. — Follow on Twitter @bonganinkunzi