The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
HAVING shone into stardom as a teenager at Highlanders, retired striker Mkhokheli Dube reckons only a vibrant junior development is key for more youngsters to break into the Premier Soccer League before the age of 20. The 38-year-old Dube, who announced his retirement on Friday after a 22-year career as an active professional player, is taking a keen interest in junior development to give young players an opportunity to shine at an early age. Dube, who now runs Zebras Academy in Tshabalala, broke into the Highlanders’ first team as a 17-year-old pupil, alongside Belgium-based Honour Gombami. He called on football leaders to prioritise grassroots development, suggesting that this was the only way the local game can grow. “We have to improve our junior development because that’s where it all starts. If we don’t, we are doomed as a football country. If we do things right at grassroots level, then the sky is the limit for Zimbabwe. We already have top quality players in the country, so we know it’s possible,” said Dube. “During my time at Bosso, we had an assistant coach called Benjamin Moyo, who was the head coach with the development side. This guaranteed continuity within the team. Young players today are not ready for the top flight and don’t have enough to take them to the finish line.” The technical team structure at Highlanders has changed over the years, with first team coaches rarely having an input in the developmental side. The head coach is said to be in overall control of the technical setup, including junior sides, but rarely attends their training sessions or matches as they clash with the senior side’s programme. After Highlanders, Dube moved to the United States of America on a football scholarship where he was “christened” Kheli. He featured for American Major League Soccer side New England Revolution between 2008 and 2011 before returning to Africa to play in the South African Premiership for AmaZulu in 2012. His stay in South Africa was short-lived as he returned home to join Chicken Inn in 2013 until the mid-2015 season after helping the Gamecocks lay the foundation for their only Premier Soccer League (PSL) title. Dube played the remainder of the 2015 season for Bulawayo City, helping the municipal side gain promotion to the top flight league. His exploits charmed FC Platinum coach Norman Mapeza, who lured him to Zvishavane at the beginning of 2016. He won two Castle Lager Premiership championship medals with FC Platinum in addition to the PSL titles he won with Bosso in 2000, 2001 and 2002. Dube encouraged young players to resist the temptation to alter their ages and believe in their talents. “I didn’t change my age because that would have affected my academic qualifications. Changing the age would’ve seen me missing out on the American scholarship. If you look at guys like Gilbert Banda, Honour Gombami and Vusa Nyoni, they didn’t change their ages and they went on to do well as professionals. So, to youngsters, believe in your talent and resist the temptation of being age cheats,” said Dube. – @ZililoR