The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Reporter
A NEW local romantic comedy feature film titled Just Say Hello that has an incredibly star-studded cast is under production and is soon set to spice up screens. Due for release in April, Just Say Hello, which is promising to be a game-changer, is a collaboration between Invision Studios and GetSetSkill. The film features renowned singer and actress Ammara Brown, Zimbabwe’s “Queen of the screen” Tendaiishe Chitima who starred on Cook-Off as well as superstar, Chi Mhende. This dynamic ensemble is completed by talented male leads in the form of South African actor TK Sebothoma from the Netflix drama Kings of Jo’Burg, Zimbabwean actor and producer Shaun Mundawarara, with the multi-talented comedian Carl Joshua Ncube supporting in his debut acting role. The movie also features a fantastic supporting cast of local actors and actresses, with a few surprises for audiences. Just Say Hello is being directed by Denise Edwards and tells a tale of love and growth, sprinkled with light humour and life lessons from the story written by Andrew E. Hammond, who is also the director. The characters find themselves entangled in resolving their fears in order to find love. Edwards said the project is set to thrill audiences as they are working flat out to deliver a well-orchestrated act. “Filming a movie during a pandemic with a tight budget has had its challenges, but we’ve pushed through as a team and are excited to bring this project to the big screen and major streaming services. “Just Say Hello is a universal story of love that we know will appeal to audiences all over Africa and the world,” said Edwards. The filming of Just Say Hello, Edwards said, kicked off in December last year with production set to be wrapped up this month. “The film will premiere to initial audiences in April this year with plans for a big-screen premiere event in Zimbabwe,” said Edwards. Executive producer, Blessing Chinanga said the hype of the production has seen them attract various players. “The initial production of this movie was self-funded, but as we started to tell our story to potential investors and sponsors, we started garnering a lot of support. Our main partner on this project is VAYA Africa who’ve shown belief to our vision by providing key support for our cast and crew during the duration of filming. “It’s been a true blessing to have a proudly Zimbabwean company support us throughout this journey. We’d also like to thank Intrinz Inc who’ve provided immense support to our project all the way from the USA,” said Chinanga. He said the film has also received huge support from Jacque Mgido Cosmetics, a brand owned by the Zimbabwean-born and US-based make-up artist. – @mthabisi_mthire