The Chronicle Sikhulekelani Moyo, Business Reporter
ZIMBABWEAN businesses stand a chance to reap huge export earnings if they tap into South Africa’s Limpopo Province, which is ripe for local goods and services. Following conclusion of a recent market intelligence survey into the neighbouring country, the country’s trade development and promotion organisation, ZimTrade, has urged producers to export more goods to Limpopo province to widen their revenue streams. Speaking during a hybrid export market briefing that was attended physically and digitally yesterday, ZimTrade manager for southern region, Jacqueline Nyathi, said Zimbabwe’s proximity to Limpopo offers a huge advantage than other competitor traders. “Buyers are complaining on the issue of consistence as they say goods are distributed through Gauteng and they come back to Limpopo province, which increases prices,” she said. “Others get goods through runners and what it means is that they spend two to three days without goods as runners face some challenges at the borders.” Among the basket of goods that can be exported to Limpopo are macadamia nuts, coffee, tea, sugar, ceramic tiles, timber and clothing. ZimTrade concluded the market survey in Limpopo province last year November in a bid to identify opportunities for Zimbabwe’s products and services.  Zimbabwe and South Africa enjoy cordial bilateral ties and both countries are members of Sothern African Development Community (Sadc) and have ratified the African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA) agreement, which came into shape January 2021. Nyathi said during the survey they found Zimbabwean goods like processed goods, construction materials and agriculture products were on demand in Limpopo. “We share borders with South Africa and from Harare to Limpopo province its 800km and from Bulawayo its 540km, which is closest in terms of distance,” she said. “As we are clear that roads have been worked on that will give us less time on the road, that is what we want in terms of trade efficiency.” Speaking at the same event, South Africa Ambassador to Zimbabwe, Mr Thizwilondi Mabudafhasi said she expects to see more trade between two countries through the use of AfCFTA. “Zimbabwe and South Africa share deep cordial economic and political relationship as two countries are both members of Sadc and within the realm of AfCFTA, which gives duty and free access to qualified goods. We expect to see more trade enabled by these trade agreements,” she said. – @SikhulekelaniM1.