The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
HIGHLANDERS utility player Rahman Kutsanzira says the team is ready to give it their all when they face city rivals Bulawayo City at Barbourfields Stadium tomorrow afternoon. Both sides will be desperate for three points with Highlanders also hoping to build on their first victory of the season.
City on the other hand are winless after four rounds of action. Kutsanzira returned to Bosso after almost four years at league champions FC Platinum. The 2016 Highlanders Player of the Year played his first game last Sunday. He was substituted at half-time after feeling dizzy but he has since recovered and is raring to go. Bosso won the encounter 2-0. “We are ready for the game. Football is not an individual sport, my teammates will help me and I will also do my part to help the team. I have received love since my return and I am grateful. I believe we just need to stand together and we will achieve our goal. We just need to be united and we can achieve a lot,” said Kutsanzira. Bosso have injury concerns ahead of their tie and coach Mandla Mpofu will be hoping some of the players would have recovered by tomorrow. “We have Ray Lunga on the injury list with an ankle problem. We hope he joins the rest of the guys after one week.  Crispen Ncube is back with a little pain after an ankle injury. Kutsanzira is back after he felt dizzy and was substituted during our last game, but he started training with the rest of the team. “There is also some concern over Adrian Silla and Nqobizitha Masuku with muscle pains and so is Stanley Ngala with a swollen ankle. But I am hopeful the medical team is working flat out to make sure these boys are fully fit by Sunday,” said Mpofu. Castle Lager Premier Soccer League action however gets underway this afternoon with action at Luveve Stadium where Bulawayo Chiefs, whose kingdom was invaded by Chicken Inn last week, play host to Mutare-based Tenax who are bubbling with confidence following their victory over Bulawayo City. In other fixtures this afternoon, ZPC Kariba will entertain FC Platinum who will be eager to get back to winning ways after going for two matches without a win and a goal. The match will be at Nyamhunga Stadium in Kariba. Harare City take on Cranborne Bullets at the National Sports Stadium with Black Rhinos welcoming Triangle United at Sakubva Stadium while Ngezi Platinum are home to Yadah. PSL Match Day Five Fixtures Saturday Bulawayo Chiefs v Tenax CS (Luveve Stadium), ZPC Kariba v FC Platinum (Nyamhunga), Harare City v Craneborne Bullets (NSS), Black Rhinos v Triangle (Sakubva) Ngezi v Yadah (Baobab) Sunday Manica Diamonds v CAPS United (Sakubva), Whawha v Herentals (Ascot), Bulawayo City v Highlanders (Barbourfields), Dynamos v Chicken Inn (NSS) -@innocentskizoe