The Chronicle Yvonne Ncube, Showbiz Reporter
The month of love is here and lovers are getting agitated about the special day, February 14 that is reserved especially for them. Their overwhelming excitement is fast spreading throughout social media platforms painting the digital world red.
The overload of obsession with Valentine’s Day on their faces is enough to make single people cringe during the days leading up to February 14. Social media platforms have seen the most enthusiastic entrepreneurs eager to market their products to the excited lovebirds. Many are promoting their products with discounts. For brands, companies and entrepreneurs, February means coming up with new ideas to attract attention so as to increase their sales. Roses, teddy bears, chocolates, jewellery and cosmetics are the most purchased products during this month of the year. They are on demand and even reach the extent of going out of stock. By the way, it is believed that people in a relationship have to purchase gifts for one another on February 14, popularly known as Valentine’s Day, the day of expressing love to your partner in the form of a token.  Generally, failure to produce any gift or token to your partner on Valentine’s Day is often perceived as a lack of commitment to the relationship and conveys an indifferent message to the partner. The arrangement behind this annual convention is that males buy for their partners yearly except on leap years, which are normally reserved for ladies, but because this is optional, other partners choose to ignore this arrangement. This is also the time of the year when social media platforms are overloaded with memes mocking single people. When the receivers of gifts blissfully show off their gifts, the single hide in their shells and re-emerge on the next day. These trends have made it hard for single people to manoeuvre during this day, so instead of the single focusing of being half a couple, they may as well take the opportunity to show themselves love too. One may escape the “couple-ism” by buying themselves the gift that they would have loved to receive from a partner, or celebrating friendships and giving to friends. Recognising the healthy connections in your life and focusing on gratitude are some things single people can do on this day. True friendships are special connections and can often result in feelings of familial-like love. Instead of celebrating romantic love on Valentine’s Day, singles can focus on celebrating the love of friendships and the meanings you create in each other’s lives. Planning a night out or watching funny movies are both ways to spend time together while you reminisce about the great times you had throughout the years. Another way of celebrating friendships is to try something new together. You may like to take time and make a list of the things you have always wanted to do like trying out a new restaurant or becoming a tourist in your own city or town. Gone are the days when singles would feel out of place on February 14, discover a new way to please yourself during the day.