The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
THERE was a lot of expectation around Bulawayo Chiefs when they got busy on the transfer market and also beat FC Platinum 2-0 in their opening game of the year, but coach Nilton Terroso now says success will not come overnight.  Since their impressive victory over the champions, Bulawayo Chiefs have lost to Chicken Inn and drew 0-0 with Tenax SC on Saturday. With doubters already pointing to the FC Platinum victory as a fluke, Terreso says he will continue to work on his team. “We want to improve and be a team which can beat and win constantly, and not someone who beats Platinum, but then loses the next game and draws the next game. Again, the win against Platinum becomes irrelevant and I said that immediately after the game. We have to continue to be stable and we have to be consistent in terms of our results and our performance. To be honest, I aid it before we beat Platinum. I think we have a long journey ahead of us and a lot of work to do,” said Terroso. “I don’t believe things can happen overnight; I don’t believe clubs that never finished in the top 10 can overnight win championships. It takes time to lay foundations. Yes, the team needs more time to know each other, to identify with how we are playing to everything that we are changing and four weeks is not a long time. One season is not enough to do that, but at the same time we have to be held responsible, me as the coach and the players. We did not do enough; we didn’t play good enough. We didn’t impose ourselves enough in terms of the quality and at the end of the day we only have ourselves to blame,” he said. The domestic transfer window is set to close in March and Chiefs have been busy in the market, beating other clubs to the signatures of Obriel Chirinda, Perfect Chikwende, Obadiah Tarumbwa, Moyo twins Kevin and Elvis as well as Kelvin Madzongwe. The ambitious side recently secured a shirt sponsorship deal with major local betting house Moors World of Sport (MWOS). MWOS’ name will be emblazoned on the front of the Ninjas’ kit for 12 months with an option to extend. – @innocentskizoe