The Chronicle Chronicle Reporter
AFTER another long Covid-19 induced school break, it will be back to class next week and the College Press in Borrowdale West, Harare, is calling on parents with children that are going to school not to miss their full range of school stock that includes revision guides that have been so helpful in preparation for the Grade Seven examinations. Schools are opening on Monday next week following reduced cases of Covid-19 in the country and the message from the book publishing company has been that parents should make use of their books that have been tried and tested as they speak to the demands of the academic needs in a period where education has been affected by the global pandemic. A new calendar for the opening of schools has been announced after the initial one was disrupted by a spike in Covid-19 cases resulting in schools opening being deferred. College Press Publisher’s Head of Sales and Marketing, Mr Samuel Ndanga, said a set of revision guides which include; Ventures Primary Physical Education and Arts, Ventures Primary Social Science, Ventures Primary Mathematics, Ventures Primary Ndebele, Ventures Primary Shona, Ventures Primary English and Ventures Primary Elementary Science were already in stock. “College Press proudly presents to you the winning formula for the learners’ Grade Seven examinations. Available at College Press and bookshops around the country is a full set of revision guides covering syllabus content from Grade Three up to Grade Seven with answers to empower learners, teachers, parents and guardians in preparing for the upcoming Grade Seven examinations.” For those who may need more information, Mr Ndanga advised them to contact College Press hotline 0719418528. He also reminded clients to visit them at their new premises at No. 1 Giraffe Crescent in Borrowdale West to purchase all revision guides for what he termed ‘a stress-free revision ride.’ The opening of schools to signal the beginning of the term has been welcomed by many including teachers’ associations that concurred that the educators were now ready to report for duty following Government’s announcement of the 2022 schools calendar.  Last Friday, acting President Dr Constantino Chiwenga announced that schools would open next Monday, as Government relaxed Covid-19 lockdown measures. According to the new calendar, schools will be opening on Monday, for 45 days and after which there shall be a break of 26 days. The second term will commence on May 3 ending on Thursday, August 4 and will have 69 days and pupils would take a 39-day break before proceeding to the third term. The third term will then start on Monday September 5 ending on Thursday December 8 and the term would be the longest with 71 days. The schools will also open on Monday January 9 for the 2023 calendar – @ TichaKaubwa