The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
MIGHTY Warriors coach Sithethelelwe Sibanda has suggested that the costly mistakes that resulted in her charges failing to qualify for the Africa Women Cup of Nations are a result of most of her players being inactive. The country has not seen any women’s football action since 2019 and there is no clear picture of when women’s football may resume. However, the senior women’s side has been taking part in various national team competitions and it’s been no surprise that they have performed badly in those competitions. On Wednesday evening, the Mighty Warriors failed to qualify for the Africa Women Cup of Nations despite winning 2-0 against Botswana at the Obed Itani Chiume Stadium in Francistown. They failed to overturn the 3-1 deficit they suffered in the first leg at the National Sports Stadium last Friday. Speaking on her side’s performance in the second leg, Sibanda said she had seen signs of improvement from the side. “It was an improved performance from the players. Everyone showed hunger, I think also they were better in terms of match fitness compared to the first leg. They gained something from that first game.  “We really tried to correct the mistakes that we had, it’s really unfortunate that we had to lose on away goals because of those goalkeeping and defensive errors. I am sure a lot of factors could have contributed there. The lack of confidence and staying for a long time without playing a match. We made a lot of mistakes in the first half of the first match and we were punished for that,” said Sibanda. She said it was always going to be difficult for them since they went for the second leg already trailing. “But I would say overall, I am happy at least there was a change. It’s very unfortunate that what we wanted to achieve in terms of the qualification didn’t come out. “The players gave their all at the end of the day. Now we have to regroup and I hope in future we can prepare better for competitions especially knowing there is no league. The girls should get into camp much longer. When we got into camp our opponents were already three weeks ahead of us meaning they were going to be ahead of us in terms of everything. I think it was a game where we could learn from it, improve and see where we go.” This is the second consecutive time that Zimbabwe will not be part of the show at the Women’s Nations Cup due to away goals rule. In 2018, the Mighty Warriors were denied a chance by Zambia after the two neighbours drew 2-2 and She-polopolo progressed on away goal rules. — @innocentskizoe