The Chronicle Yoliswa Dube-Moyo, Matabeleland South Bureau Chief
THE fall armyworm is threatening crops at the vegetative stage in Matabeleland South province with farmers being urged to scout and spray the pest to avoid loss. The fall armyworm is an invasive moth which is difficult to detect and control. It was first noticed in Africa in January 2016, causing massive damage to crops in several West African countries, according to the International Institute of Tropical Agriculture.  In its native regions, it can travel up to 2  000km each year in search of warmer climates. Since 2016, the invasive fall armyworm has been one of the most rapidly spreading and highly devastating maize pests across Africa and Asia. In 2017, an outbreak of fall armyworm hit Arda Ingwizi Estate in Matabeleland South where a yield of about 4 500 tonnes of maize was expected. Matabeleland South acting provincial agricultural officer Mr Mkhunjulelwa Ndlovu said the fall armyworm becomes active when it is warm. “When we have had such sunshine for some days as we have now, the fall armyworm becomes active especially at the vegetative stage of crops. The worm is threatening crops at the vegetative stage and farmers are encouraged to make efforts to control it. If not controlled, it will disturb the crops and affect yields even though farmers are trying their best to be above the situation in terms of pest control because now they know it and its consequences if it’s not controlled,” said Mr Ndlovu. He said the absence of rain in the past two weeks has seen the rise of cases of the fall armyworm in the province. “We’re seeing cases of fall armyworm especially because we have gone for almost two weeks without the rains. Farmers are taking measures to control the pest and the GMB (Grain Marketing Board) has distributed some chemicals to farmers so that they can spray to control the pest.” “I encourage farmers to continue scouting and spraying the pest because once it matures and the cycle is not broken, it becomes a menace in the next season. Once farmers start to see a few of the worms, they have to start spraying because it’s a very dangerous pest in terms of crop production,” said Mr Ndlovu. He said the fall armyworm can affect maize, sorghum and pearl millet although it is more pronounced on the maize crop so farmers have to continuously scout and spray the pest. The fall armyworm bores into the cobs and does far more damage than the stalk borer or boll-worm, which usually attack at cob stage. It makes a lot of yellowish debris and whitish powder on the leaves and in the funnel where they are. – @Yolisswa