The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili, Chronicle Reporter
BULAWAYO yesterday evening had a massive send-off for youths who will attend today’s National Youth Day commemoration to be addressed by President Mnangagwa in Harare where the major focus is tackling drug abuse. The President is expected to launch the National Drug Abuse Fund, a product of the 2022 National Budget. Today’s event at Robert Mugabe Square is running under the theme: “Alleviate Substance and Drug Abuse by the Youth”.  The country is facing a rising drug problem with health experts saying there is an urgent need to tackle the problem which has seen drug-related admissions at psychiatric hospitals like Ingutsheni Central Hospital increasing. Nearly 30 buses were expected to ferry youths to Harare and by 5PM 20 buses had already been loaded. The youths were seen off by Bulawayo Provincial Affairs and Devolution Minister Judith Ncube. Bulawayo Provincial Affairs and Devolution Permanent Secretary Mr Paul Nyoni said the province was targeting to send 30 buses for the National Youth Day commemorations.  Mr Nyoni said the theme of today’s commemorations resonates with the drug problem, one of the biggest challenges that society is dealing with. “We are now suffering under an attack of all illicit drugs. Our youths are in trouble and when they respond so enthusiastically, to a meeting, to an event which is discussing that problematic issue, it is very encouraging. We are in a situation where the whole country, the Cabinet, is talking about finding solutions about drug abuse,” said Mr Nyoni. He said youths from all walks of life made the trip from Bulawayo. “The people we have loaded here include persons from four of our tertiary schools in Bulawayo. They sent bus loads each, youth living with disabilities, church youths so it’s a cross-cutting representation. We also have youths who are in the field of politics who are involved as well. So, we are very happy about the response,” he said.  Minister Ncube said the National Youth Day is an important day on the country’s calendar. “The 21st February is a very important day, it’s a day where as a country and Government we try to bring young people together. When they are together, they are able to share their experiences, they are able to learn from other young people and more so they are going to be addressed by the President His Excellency Cde ED Mnangagwa,” said Minister Ncube. She said the private sector should come on board with empowerment programmes for the youth. Zanu-PF Youth League Bulawayo secretary for security Cde Godknows Mudhari said the National Youth Day was significant as it allows the country’s leadership to interact with the youth on issues affecting young people. “We are very lucky that in Zimbabwe we have a President who values the youth and tomorrow we are to meet the President of the Republic of Zimbabwe who is going to outline the views that he has as far as the youths are concerned. Through his manifestos, he prescribes so many issues and there are so many issues that the youth perceive to be important as far as their development, issues to do with empowerment, issues to do with job creation and those are some of the issues that we expect tomorrow,” said Cde Mudhari. He encouraged young people to follow today’s proceedings even virtually to understand the national vision as far as youths are concerned. — @nqotshili