The Chronicle Mbulelo Mpofu, Showbiz Reporter
MUSICIANS Jah Prayzah, Nutty O and Janet Manyowa stole the limelight as the National Arts Merit Awards (Nama) unveiled nominees with fast rising comedian Uncle Zex Mdawini, also up for a gong. The announcement for the 20th edition was made on the Nama Facebook page in preparation for the award ceremony to be held on February 26, 2022 in Harare. The 20th edition of the Nama will be held under the theme “Zimbabwe and Beyond #AmaLevels.”  Jah Prayzah and Nutty O topped with three nominations each while gospel singer Janet Manyowa got two nominations and Bulawayo comedian Hidden “Uncle Mdawini” Sibanda made his debut in the competition. There are 108 nominees. National Arts Council of Zimbabwe (NACZ) director, Nicholas Moyo noted with concern how the Covid-19 pandemic adversely affected creatives, especially visual artists since lockdown restrictions kept most galleries and exhibitions closed for prolonged periods. Also, a concerning lack of creativity and artistic depth in the dance entries was noted since “some of the submissions were too short to constitute a serious dance production for consideration.” Amid the negativities, Mr Moyo noted some improvement in the literary arts category. “There was a considerable increase in the amount of material submitted for the Literary Arts Awards. There were also a lot of good books submitted, while online submissions tended to be of inferior quality, as many submitted unpublished books. There was an impressive increase of entries of books in vernacular,” said Moyo. He said there were 2 135 entries received for adjudication at the close of nomination period on November, 30 2021. These entries were for the visual arts, theatre, literary arts, film and television, dance, media, spoken word, and music categories. Notably, there were no nominees for the Outstanding Exhibition category. Last year, the Namas were not held due to the Covid-19 pandemic and were replaced by Nama Legends @40, an appreciation ceremony where 40 arts legends were recognised for their contribution to the industry. Nama 2022 Full Nominees List: 1. DANCE AWARDS Outstanding Female Dancer Lisa Magwenzi in Love shouldn’t hurt Lorin Sibanda in Footprints Ndomupeishe Chipendo in Shuwa Outstanding Male Dancer Devante Sanganza in My Passion for dance John Cole in Gotta Feeling Tichaona Chikara in Purpose Driven Outstanding Dance Choreographer Mishael Ndlovu in Most High John Cole in Loyal Hillary Indie in Tipei Ndiro Outstanding Dance Group Ezimnyama Ensemble in Hope Umkhathi Theatre in Footprints Elysium Magna Dance Theatre in Tipei Ndiro 2. VISUAL ARTS AWARDS Outstanding 2-Dimensional Work Yadeuka Haichahorereke by Keith Zenda Free at Last by Keith Zenda Domination by Joseph Nyakwenga Outstanding 3-Dimensional Nhumbu by Tatenda Gwarada Tears of Happy by Blesssing Mutukwa Bundle of Joy by Farai Tandi My Music Drum by Simelokuhle Zibengwa Outstanding Mixed Media Do not destroy us by Rickson Zavare Garandichauya Series 3 by Prudence Chimutuwah Restoration by Forbes Mushipe Outstanding Exhibition No Nominees 3. SPOKEN WORD AWARDS Outstanding Poet Obert Dube Kuda Rice Tanyaradzwa Emily Ngundu Outstanding Comedian Theophilus Gabriel Chigumira aka @astra 632 Hidden Sibanda aka Mdawini Kudzai Chengedza Special Mention Mthokozisi Ncube Social Media Skits Tarisai Cleopatra Chikocho aka Madam Boss Prosper Ngomashi aka Comic Pastor Kingsley Kaisi aka KingsleeZW 4. MEDIA AWARDS Outstanding Journalist – Print Sithokozile Sibanda – Ilanga Kennedy Nyavaya – Standard Yvonne Ncube – Chronicle Outstanding Journalist – Radio Monica Chanda aka Moechanda – Classic263 Rumbidzai Mugwira aka Chamvari – Power FM Phathisani Sibanda & Tinashe Chikuse – Power FM Outstanding Journalist – Television Collette Musanyera – ZBC Patience Nyagato – ZBC Barney Mupariwa – ZBC Outstanding Journalist – Online Media Amazing Voices – Nonkululeko Dube aka AmardZW SoProfound – Arnold Chirimuka Earground – Plot Mhako Special Mention: Nash TV 5. THEATRE AWARDS Outstanding Actor Shawn Mundawarara in Choosing Sam Cedric Musongwelwa in Deathbed Tafadzwa Bob Mutumbi in The Good Minister from Kunyarara Outstanding Actress Munyaradzi Guramatunhu in How are you really? Eyahra Mathaiza in How are you really? Rumbidzai Karize in Deathbed Special Mention Patricia Putsai in Bleeding wounds Outstanding Theatrical Production Deathbed by Savanna Trust Improvisational show at Oak Tree by Under The Influence Theatre How are you really? by Talisma Theatre Company Outstanding Director Norbert Makoche in Bleeding wounds Elizabeth Zaza Muchemwa in How are you really? Teddy Mangava in Deathbed 6. LITERARY AWARDS Outstanding First Creative Published Work Bringing us back by Mercy Dhliwayo [Vhokololo Press] Diaspora Dreams by Andrew Chatora [Kharis Publishing] Umkhosi Wabangela Mazwi by Pretty Ndlovu [Ukhozi Publishers] Outstanding Children’s Book The Cursing Tortoise by Onwald Gwiriri [Essential Books PublishingCompany] Auntie Mazvita by Tinashe Muchuri [Essential Books Publishing Company] Tim’s Adventure in the Chocolate World by Chris Martin Lebolang [Hoart Benom Pty Publishing] Special Mention ConvergenceZW by Mgcini Nyoni [Mgcini Nyoni] Dear Eternal Mom by Kuda Mucharambeyi[Soar Publishers] Outstanding Fiction Book Mboni by Abraham Makamera [Progressive Publishers] All Comes to Dust by Bryony Rheam [amaBooks] Sirens:Tales of Youth and Love by Leroy Mthulisi Ndlovu [Leroy MthulisiNdlovu] Outstanding Poetry Book
Oasis in crisis by Ruth Tsopotsa [Ancient Pageant] For women Trying to breath and failing (It’s not your fault) by Batsirai Chigama [Ntombekhaya Poetry] Who killed Grandfather? by Kwanele Khumalo [Underclass Books and Films] 7. FILM AND TELEVISION AWARDS Outstanding Actor Kumbilani Ncube as Khalu in Ikasi: The Hood Eddie Sandifolo as Maso in Poor Cousins Michael Kudakwashe as Matsa in Kugara Nhaka Kuona Dzevamwe Outstanding Actress Bathabile Dlamini as Blessing in Poor Cousins Thelmar Mukonza as Feli in Sister Dhokezi Felistas Tizola as Immaculate in Two Dead Government Officials Outstanding Music Video Nhoroondo Directed by Vusa”Blaqs” Hlatshwayo ft. Jah
Prayzah Rainmaker Directed by Kalai Faye Barlow ft. Djembe Monks Move Together Directed by Jonathan Samukange ft. Desert
Sessions Outstanding Screen Production (Television) Kuchina The Genesis Directed by Bless Gatsi Gazaland Police Directed by Lucky Aaron Chipo the Gift Directed by Daves Guzha Outstanding Screen Production (Short Film) Ikasi: The Hood Directed by Mzingaye Ngwabi Mlamu Wami Directed by Raisedon Baya Nehanda Directed by Sydney Taivavashe Outstanding Screen Production (Full Length Film) Gonarezhou Directed by Sydney Taivavashe Poor Cousins Directed by Sydney Taivavashe Veza: The Unfolding Directed by Dumie Manyathela 8. MUSIC AWARDS Outstanding New Comer Felistas Chipendo aka Feli Nandi Sandra Sibanda Herman Mpelo Mukombe Day Tawanda Ncube aka DT Bio Mudimba Outstanding Female Musician Janet Manyowa Felistas Chipendo aka Feli Nandi Dorcas Moyo Gemma Griffiths Outstanding Male Musician Mukudzei Mukombe aka Jah Prayzah Simbarashe Carrington Chiwadzwa aka Nutty O Rockford Josephat aka Roki Emergy Chizanga aka Freeman Outstanding Song Kujata-Jata by Day Tawanda Ncube aka DT Bio Mudimba Munyaradzi by Mukudzei Mukombe aka Jah Prayzah Hello Mwari by Rodney Mashandure aka Jah Master Handipere Power by Simbarashe Carrington Chiwadzwa aka Nutty O Outstanding Album Hokoyo by Mukudzei Mukombe aka Jah Prayzah Sounds of Victory by Janet Manyowa Mustard Seed by Simbarashe Carrington Chiwadzwa aka
Nutty O 5136 Born in Highfield by Trevor Dongo. 9. SPECIAL AWARDS Promoter Of The Year X-Mo Squad Bira Remadzisahwirwa Gateway Stream Outstanding Artist In The Diaspora Arnold Tongai Chirisa Awakhiwe Sibanda aka Awa Khiwe Zandile Mazithulela aka DJ Zandimaz
– @eMKlass49