The Chronicle Sikhulekelani Moyo, Business Reporter
BULAWAYO Mining Company How Mine has embarked on a surface and underground exploration exercise aimed at opening up the resource base to enhance business expansion. Exploration activities are critical for mining operation as they help identity the available minerals deposits that can be commercially extracted, thereby helping to determine the company’s future and possibility for expansion.  The company’s managing director, Mr Kimbton Chiota, told delegates during a recent standards re-certification ceremony held at the mine that the business was keen on expansion as it seeks to contribute to the national mining targets. “The mine is currently carrying out explorations, both on surface and underground in order to open up the resource base for expansion,” said Mr Chiota. “We remain focused on contributing towards the Government’s target of a US$12 billion mining industry by the year 2023.” The mining industry is one of the sectors anchoring the economy and is set to drive the country towards the attainment of an upper middle-income economy by 2030. In 2019, the Government launched the US$12 billion mining industry to be achieved by 2023. The multi-billion-dollar industry will be driven by gold, platinum, diamond, chrome, iron ore, coal, lithium, and other minerals. How Mine recorded 59 percent gold output in 2021, which was beyond what the company targeted as their pegged target for 2021 was 50 percent. “I am pleased to announce to you that How Mine set new mining and milling production records in the year 2021. “Gold output increased to 59 percent as compared to the previous year,” said Mr Chiota. The improved performance was on the back of a capital injection of US$5 million for the shaft sinking project, which opened up new mining areas and the project was commissioned in the last quarter of the year 2020. During the ceremony, How Mine was awarded Standard Association of Zimbabwe (SAZ) certification for successfully using internationally recognised management procedures. “Today, our company receives recognition for successfully implementing internationally-recognised management systems, ISO 14001:2015 and ISO 9001:2015,” said Mr Chiota. “What we are witnessing here today is a business that has reached some of the highest principles expected of businesses in the modern world. “It means that, today, Bulawayo Mining Company is committing itself to the highest standards in its operations and in its service to the community, and to our country.” Mr Chiota said the mine started with the implementation of the ISO 14001:2004 environmental management system, which was a commitment to the highest standards in managing and protecting environment. “We also implemented the globally renowned behaviour-based safety programme as a result, we saw a massive drop in annual injury numbers by 60 percent,” he said. Speaking at the same event, SAZ director-general Eve Gadzikwa said the company had been recognised for its commitment to ensure safety of workers and the environment. “This important milestone underlines the determination and commitment of management and staff in safeguarding the health and safety of staff and stakeholders and protecting the environment,” she said. – @SikhulekelaniM1