The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Reporter
MUSICIAN Mzoe 7 will tomorrow stage the first of a series of shows dubbed “A night with Mzoe 7” as part of efforts to market his brand. The inaugural show will be held at The Vista and there will be live recording and photo booth. It will be hosted by Khekhe and on the decks will be DJ Dosto and Toxic Chemicals (Spirit Saba). The show comes after Mzoe 7, who is also a choreographer, dancer and film director performed at the Zimbabwe Music Awards (Zima) at the weekend. Clad in a red bulletproof vest, red Allstar takkies and Gucci bucket hat, Mzoe7 came through the entrance that was used by the guests when everyone expected him to come from backstage. Accompanied by Majoer Prod, their act got everyone on their feet. Commenting on the upcoming shows, Mzoe 7 said he decided to stage the shows as it has been a while since he performed locally. “It’s been a while since we gave people a show locally and we feel it’s time to do so and also introduce the other acts we are working with such as Master Zhoe, La Dee, Majoer Prodi, Maggie, Xstudios and many more.  “This will be one of the first gigs for our people after a tour around the country including cities like Vic Falls, Harare and Chinhoyi,” he said. Mzoe 7 said the shows will also cascade to local townships with the debut one set to be held in Entumbane suburb on March 6. Turning to his Zima performance, Mzoe 7 said: “I love and respect the stage so I wanted to give people a five-star piece and I’m sure we did. “To everyone I worked with and also the Zima team, I’d like to thank them for giving me the platform to entertain our people,” he said. Mzoe 7 said after the Zima show, he staged another show in Chinhoyi at Jongwe Corner the next day where he shared the stage with the likes of Phathisani Sibanda, Madiz and Merciless. “It was actually my first time to be in Chinhoyi but I’m happy with the reception I got as people fell in love with Amapiano and I’m definitely going back,” he said. Mzoe7 said he is planning to take his act across Africa. – @mthabisi_mthire.