The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
POTENTIALLY explosive Castle Lager Premier Soccer League Match Day 4 fixtures are on the cards, with the City of Kings derby between Chicken Inn and Bulawayo Chiefs, as well as the FC Platinum-Dynamos clash being weekend draw-cards. Chicken Inn and Chiefs lock horns at Luveve Stadium this afternoon while defending champions FC Platinum, still licking their wounds from last weekend’s 2-0 defeat to Chiefs play host to DeMbare at Mandava Stadium. What makes the two encounters the picks of the weekend is that the four clubs dream of clinching the championship and they are aware that any slip could see the gap between pacesetters increasing. Chicken Inn and Chiefs go into today’s encounter buoyant following their last weekend’s victories, when the Gamecocks registered a 3-0 win against Tenax CS FC. Both teams have had players crossing the floor to join the other, with Chicken Inn previously pouncing on Chiefs’ players who include Last Sithole and midfielder Shepherd Mhlanga. Chiefs snapped up striker Obriel Chirinda from the Gamecocks during the January transfer window, with Chicken Inn threatening approaching the courts should the PSL fail to withdraw the player’s licence having alleged improper registration. Chirinda was on target when Chiefs beat FC Platinum and it is not clear if Chiefs will field Chirinda against his former paymasters. Having passed the champions’ test, Chiefs who were the busiest club during the January transfer window, face another stern test in Joey Antipas’ Chicken Inn. The Gamecocks had Chirinda’s replacement Marlvin Hwata making an immediate impact as he got a brace against Tenax CS FC. The battle is likely to be won and lost in the midfield, where Chicken Inn have Mhlanga, Brett Amidu, Richard Hachiro who they signed from Caps United and Michael Charamba. They also have winger George Majika and Denzel Khumalo who on a good day can either score or come up with assists. Chiefs on the other hand have seasoned national team defensive midfielder Kelvin Madzongwe, Lucky Ndlela, Hughe Chikosa and exciting 21-year-old Mthokozisi Msebe pulling strings in the midfield. Perfect Chikwende occasionally drops from the from to help the midfielders if need be. A victory for Chicken Inn will see them being equal on nine points with leaders Manica Diamonds who take on Herentals tomorrow. Should third placed Chiefs manage to get maximum points, they’ll top the table with 10 points, one ahead of leaders Manica Diamonds. Second-placed Ngezi Platinum Stars are on seven points and take on Caps United on Monday. Dynamos will be plotting FC Platinum’s downfall, having made eight signings in a bid to bring glory to the Harare giants.. DeMbare took on board ex-FC Platinum man Ralph Kawondera, Keith Murera, Brendon Mpofu, Evans Katema, Issa Sadiki as well as two Ghanaians Emmanuel Paga and Martin Ofori; and Nigerian Alex Orotomal.  It will be folly of DeMbare to think that they’ll have an easy walk in the park as FC Platinum’s young brigade of gangly forward Thando Ngwenya, Panashe Mutimbanyoka, Kalvin Mangiza and Oscar Bhebhe are capable of running down Dynamos. Tomorrow, Highlanders will be hoping to get their first win of the season against Premiership returnees Whawha at Barbourfields Stadium, while Tawurayi Mangwiro travels to the Lowveld with Harare City to face his former paymasters Triangle United. Fixtures
Today: Chicken Inn v Bulawayo Chiefs (Luveve), FC Platinum v Dynamos (Mandava), Yadah v Black Rhinos (Baobab) Tomorrow: Highlanders v Whawha (Barbourfields), Herentals v Manica Diamonds (National Sports Stadium), Cranbourne Bullets v ZPC Kariba (Baobab), Tenax CS FC v Bulawayo City (Sakubva), Triangle United v Harare City (Gibbo) Monday: Caps United v Ngezi Platinum Stars (National Sports Stadium) -@ZililoR