The Chronicle Michael Magoronga, Midlands Correspondent Kwekwe City Council has increased tariffs by more than 500 percent and residents are complaining that they have started receiving what they say are outrageous water bills. Government approved Kwekwe’s $7,5 billion budget and the local authority quickly effected new tariffs. Residents say they are struggling with the new bills. “I used to pay around $3000 per month but I was shocked to receive a bill of $24 000. Surely, in this economic climate, where do I get the money? I think they should have staggered their increases rather than doing it once off,” said Mr Robert Tadiwa of Mbizo 9. Another resident, Mrs Samukelisiwe Shoko of Mbizo said it was worrying that council was basing water charges on estimates. “Council should employ meter readers who make sure that whatever we are charged is what we use. As it is, this is fraud because they just sit behind a desk and charge what they think,” she said. Mr Jephias Makoni of Mbizo 15 said taps in his area ran dry years back, yet he keeps receiving ‘outrageous’ bills.  “We last received water in our taps some years back, yet we received a bill, which is outrageous for that matter. Council should be looking into these matters if they want normal service from us. I have approached council many times and they keep promising to solve the matter,” said Mr Makoni. Kwekwe Acting Town Clerk, Engineer John Mhike said council had not increased tariffs since January 2021 hence the charges had become unsustainable. “The December 2021 bills were similar to the January 2021 ones as council did not increase bills from the beginning of the year and this was unsustainable. “As a result, service delivery lagged behind and right now the 500 percent being talked about is not considering the month-on-month inflation adjustment from January to December 2021,” said Eng Mhike. He said inflation had not spared Kwekwe. “The price distortions did not spare Kwekwe City Council and our 2022 budget was a zero-based budget using market prices and cost build up with tariffs. During the 2022  budget consultations, this was raised to residents. It is unfortunate that some of our ratepayers never attend these important meetings,” he said. He said already the cost of water chemicals, transport and electricity had gone up, hence council had no option but increase tariffs. In fact, said Eng Mhike, the proposed tariffs which were presented to residents during budget consultations were also reduced in response to the residents’ pleas. Eng Mhike said the shortage of water meter readers is being addressed. “Council is in the process of procuring prepaid water meters to replace the non-working ones. However, the estimated charge was reduced from 30 kilolitres to 25 kilolitres for the year 2022 taking into consideration the residents’ sentiments that estimated charges were on the high side,” he said.