The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili, Chronicle Reporter
THIRTY-NINE candidates are vying for eight local authority seats in Bulawayo in the march 26 by-elections and a local residents association has said it will organise public debates for the aspiring councillors to articulate their vision for the city. The Zimbabwe Electoral Commission (Zec) yesterday released the names of all the successful nominees after the Nomination Court sitting on January 26. In Ward 14 Umguza Rural District Council, the ruling party won unchallenged and Cde Delay Ncube was declared a winner as no other party fielded candidates. In Bulawayo’s Ward 26 the Nelson Chamisa-led Citizens Coalition for Change (CCC) fielded two candidates; Normal Hlabani and Mpumelelo Moyo. Zanu-PF will be represented by Cde Lungisani Sibanda, Japhet Ncube will stand for Democratic Opposition Party, Simangele Ndebele represents MDC-A and Janana Ngwenya is an independent candidate. Mr Chamisa’s party also fielded two candidates in Ward 9; Donaldson Mabuto and Bekithemba Nyathi, while MDC-A has Mr John Mhlanga-Gasela, United Democratic Alliance (UDA) Innocent Msipha and the All-People’s Party David Ncube.  Labour, Economists and African Democrats fielded Philisani Ncube and Cde Lovemore Munyamana will represent Zanu-PF. In Ward 12, Esnat Khumalo is on the ticket of the Republican Party of Zimbabwe, Lilian Mlilo is under CCC, Visitor Ndebele MDC-Alliance, Cde Mary Ncube will stand for Zanu-PF and Casper Sibanda will contest under Zapu. In Ward 18, Cde Enock Madzimure will represent Zanu-PF, Concilia Mlalazi will represent CCC, Taringana Mupfuyiwa will contest under UDA Party while Gibson Sikhosana is contesting under Zapu and Sibonakaliso Tshuma will stand under the MDC-Alliance. In Ward 19 there are four candidates; Mr Christopher Dube of CCC; Cde Ntando Moyo of Zanu-PF, Peter Ncube MDC-Alliance and Adam Pambano of Zapu while Ward 20 will have three contestants, Cde Freedom Thwala representing Zanu-PF, Earnest Rafamoyo of CCC and Ethel Sibanda from MDC-Alliance. In Ward 21, Cde Janet Moyo is representing Zanu-PF, Tinevimbo Maphosa for CCC and MDC-Alliance has Yokoniya Zimba.–@nqotshili