The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter 
THE encounter between Chicken Inn and Dynamos will headline this weekend’s Castle Premier Soccer League fixtures, which the GameCocks gaffer Joey Antipas says could go either way. The two sides meet at the National Sports Stadium on Sunday in a potentially explosive encounter.  Ahead of the tie, Antipas believes both sides have done good business in the transfer window and there is no obvious favourite going into the encounter. “It’s a game that could go either way. They have boosted their squad and the coach seems to be happy with his squad. So we know we have to go out there and apply what we have been doing during training. We know that their chances are as good as ours. We have to put up a big fight to come up with a positive result,” said Antipas. Chicken Inn have won their last two encounters since the league’s restart, beating Tenax 3-0 before managing a 2-1 victory against Bulawayo Chiefs last Sunday. Despite the back-to-back victories, Antipas has refused to put his side into the title mix. “It’s way too early to be talking about the title. Yes, we have had a great start, but we are taking each game as it comes. There are so many teams that appear to be contenders and as such we are not focusing on that. We just want to focus on the next game,” he said. Chicken Inn are second on the league table and have collected nine points from four outings. They have made a number of additions to their side, including the likes of Denzel Khumalo from FC Platinum, Tawanda Zinaka from Bulawayo City, striker Brighton Ncube from the Mkhokheli Dube-owned Tshabalala-based Zebra Revolution, midfielder Richard Hachiro from Caps United and Malvin Hwata from Cranborne Bullets. Dynamos on the other hand have collected seven points in their four matches and sit seventh on the standings. The Harare giants made a number of signings in the transfer window, including that of Ghanaian Emmanuel Paga. Paga made his debut on Saturday together with Keith Murera, Issa Sadiki, Ralph Kawondera, Brandon Mpofu and Evans Katema when they picked up a point away from home following a 0-0 draw with FC Platinum. The other foreigners signed by the Harare giants are Martin Ofori and Alex Oromatal. Fixtures Saturday Bulawayo Chiefs vs Tenax (Luveve Stadium) ZPC Kariba vs FC Platinum (Nyamhunga Stadium) Harare City vs Cranborne Bullets (National Sports Stadium) Black Rhinos vs Triangle, (Sakubva Stadium) Ngezi Platinum vs Yadah (Baobab) Sunday
Manica Diamonds vs Caps United (Sakubva) Whawha vs Herentals (Ascot Stadium) Bulawayo City vs Highlanders (Barbour fields Stadium), Dynamos vs Chicken ( National Sports Stadium) — @innocentskizoe