The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
ZIFA Southern Region Division One side CIWU have appointed Morris Mukwiti as their head coach on a permanent basis. He will be assisted by Khonzani Ncube formerly with White Birds FC. Mukwiti has been conducting his duties on a caretaker basis since the departure of Kudzayi Mhandire who left the side to join Arenel in 2019. CIWU who were initially not part of the Division One programme only joined the league after army side Moto Moto dropped out of the league. “What makes me happy is the faith the executive has shown in me. Remember due to the Covid19 pandemic, our sponsor has been struggling and working under very extremely bad and unfavourable conditions. As you know the side is run by the clothing workers union, things have been tough. “Most workers in the clothing Industry were made redundant, and that is why the club failed to participate in the Wafa Wafa Cup. I have been given a tough task of fighting for the championship which means there is a lot of work to do,” Mukwiti said. CIWU have played two league games this season and are yet to win a game having managed one all stalemates against Mountain Climbers and Casmyn. In other matches played at the weekend, Hwange fc saw their winning run come to an end at the weekend but remained top of the table with sevens points from three games. Having beaten Makhandeni Pirates 3-1 at the Colliery before they thumped Indlovu Iyanyathela 7-1 in their opening two fixtures, Chipangano could not find a way past Ajax Hotspurs at White City Stadium on Saturday. The two sides settled for a goalless draw. Hwange who are under the guidance of former Highlanders coach Bongani Mafu had beaten Makhandeni seeking an early return to the Premier Soccer League. Second-placed Ratanang drew 1-1 with Quality Foods at Luveve Stadium’s B-arena on Saturday while Bosso90 picked another point when they drew 1-1 against Mainline at White City just like they did against Ajax Hotspurs last Sunday at the same venue. Zimbabwe Saints suffered their second consecutive defeat as they lost 3-0 to the Thomas Sweswe coached FC Talen Vision. Results Binga Pirates 0-1 Arenel, Casmyn 1-1 CIWU, Ajax Hotspurs 0-0 Hwange, Bosso90 1-1 Mainline, ZPC Hwange v Indlovu Iyanyathela (postponed), Mountain Climbers 1-1 Mosi Rovers, Ratanang 1-1 Quality Foods, Zimbabwe Saints 0-3 Talen Vision. -@innocentskizoe