The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili, Chronicle Reporter
BULAWAYO City Council (BCC) will this month intensify water disconnections at properties where rate payers owe the local authority in a bid to recover nearly $2,3 billion in outstanding payments. Failure to pay bills is said to be partially contributing to the decline in service delivery and failure to pay service providers who are owed $1,8 billion by the local authourity.  In a statement yesterday, Bulawayo town clerk Mr Christopher Dube said rate payers should clear their bills to avoid having their water disconnected. “The City of Bulawayo would like to advise its valued customers, ratepayers and stakeholders that we will be intensifying debt collection from this month of February 2022 through service restrictions and other measures to all residential and commercial properties whose accounts are in arrears. You are therefore encouraged to pay your accounts and bring them to date or make suitable arrangement so that you are not inconvenienced by these measures,” said Mr Dube. He said residents can use both online and traditional payment methods.
In the latest council minutes, the municipality expressed concern that the local authority may fail to recover debts. “Debtors increased by seven percent while creditors increased by one percent. Council is running the risk of being unable to collect the debt and consequently pay the creditors. In order to manage creditors, management has made arrangements with various creditors to settle dues,” read the minutes. “Meanwhile, to assist ratepayers settle their dues, Council availed platforms such as Ecocash, One wallet, Telecash and internet banking for ratepayers as alternative ways to make payments.” The minutes state that Ward 5 councillor Felix Mhaka noted with concern the increase in the number of the city’s debtors.
According to the report, Clr Mhaka said the non-payment of bills was contributing to a decline in service delivery in the city. “He felt that the Financial Services Department had not intensified its debt collection hence the ballooning debts. Council had failed to deliver because residents had adopted a culture of not paying for the services rendered to them. He further noted that all the vehicles in the cleansing section had been grounded due to lack of spares and tyres. Efforts should be made to recover what residents owed and improve on service delivery,” read the minutes. The report further said Ward 7 Clr Shadreck Sibanda suggested that council should engage debt collectors on the best way of collecting debts. “The Deputy Mayor (Councillor Mlandu Ncube) said that there was a need to intensify debt collection especially in the western suburbs where the debt was seriously ballooning. With regards to prepaid meters, he suggested that the pilot project should commence with new properties and then cascade to other areas,” read the minutes. “The finance committee chairperson (Councillor T. Ruzive) was of the opinion that council should engage the services of an agent where residents could purchase the prepaid water meters to speed up the process.” The local authority said it has set up a debt recovery unit, but its operations were hampered by manpower and transport challenges. “The city was being serviced by only two vehicles. Efforts to disconnect water in the eastern suburbs had been hampered by lack of transport and the location of households. Unlike in the western suburbs, door to door disconnections was not a challenge,” reads the minutes. It said residents have a culture of not paying bills and only respond when water supplies are disconnected. According to the minutes, chamber secretary Mrs Sikhangele Zhou said introducing pre-paid meters could solve the non-payment of bills problem. “With regards to the prepaid meters, she recalled that some property owners had showed interest in the project. Those with interest would be considered when the project commenced. She further advised that council’s main stores had not been getting enough financial support to carry out their duties,” reads the minutes. “This had resulted in some of the services being outsourced. She further said that efforts should be made to retool the workshop. She appreciated that council had limited resources, however there was a need to prioritise some of the services.”