The Chronicle Wallace Musakanyi and David Makora
THE commercialisation of the struggle for democracy in Zimbabwe by political animals under the banner of activism grossly undermines the effectiveness of democratic governance and is also an insult to the political and constitutional fundamentals that guide and direct the political dispensation of Zimbabwe. Through the normative lenses, activists are critical agents that add meaningful insights to the democratic political system. Activists act as whistle-blowers and watchdogs in ensuring effective democratic assistance, promote policy advocacy and lobbying, complement the Government in championing civil and other constitutional mandates. Democracy, therefore, is bound to remain on life support especially without the spirited efforts of the activists. Nevertheless, the meaning and the modus operandi of activists has been contaminated in Zimbabwe and has deviated greatly from their intended roles of feeding into the democratic consolidation grid so as to promote good governance, nation building and reputable branding of the nation. Political activism is also proving to be a lucrative and viable professional career as noted by a shocking increase of political activists on the political terrain who are willing to demean and decampaign their beloved country in the name of activism and the ultimate goal being to line up their dirty pockets. Some contemporary activists are also referred to as cashivists because their input has nothing to do with widening the democratic consolidation in Zimbabwe but is all about cash, cash and cash. Zimbabwe’s contemporary political activism is recognised by some of the renowned pressure groups like Tajamuka which is headed by Promise Mkwananzi, a former student leader.  Back in 2017, still in the name of activism and promoting democracy in Zimbabwe it is alleged that the Tajamuka leader Promise Mkwananzi was accused of abusing thousands of US dollars which were mobilised in order to facilitate the organisation’s activities. The activist further personalised a Subaru vehicle that was meant for the operations of the organisation’s activities. This exposes detrimental nature of commercialising the struggle for democracy by political activists as it has turned activists into money mongers, fraudsters and conmen because the realisation of democracy is their secondary, if not tertiary objective while their immediate goal is to profiteer and earn more cash. Conventionally, the general perception in the 21st political landscape, state institutions have been blamed as outspoken critics of democratic governance. However, this widely held rhetoric proved fruitless as activists who have become theoretical chief advocates of democratic assistance are manipulated to advance external interest. The white lip-black tongue syndrome is what constitutes political activism today. The tune of democratic assistance is not in tandem with the dance through their actions which impacted negatively on political polarisation and apathy among the youths and women participation in politics. One way in which activists in Zimbabwe receive funding is through democracy assistance. Thus, the effect the receipt of such aid had on the ways in which opposition activists organise and on their ideological orientation. Hence the availability of such aid influence the commercialisation of the struggle for democracy where it is viewed as opportunism for living. This led to a formidable decline in passion, trust and voluntarism among opposition activists. On a worrisome note, the commercialisation of the struggle for democracy is toxic and a key source of political destabilisation as it feeds into the neo-liberal trap thereby reviving neocolonialism if not handled with high caution and pragmatism. It is in that light that Thomas Sankara’s quote, “He who feeds you controls you,” will never go in vain as it establishes that through the commercialisation of the struggle for democracy, the political activists sacrifices their autonomy and conscience as they will eventually become the surrogates merely representing the interests of their funders. Moreover, alliances between the opposition inclined activists with external players, specifically the Western countries, serves as telling evidence of how activism which is one of the legs which forms the stool of democratic space has been commercialised thereby abrogating the authentic function and scope of political activism. One such organisation is the Crisis Coalition in Zimbabwe headed by Rashid Mahiya which enjoys cordial relations with USA. Prescriptively, the organisation focuses on human rights, democratic consolidation, politics and governance issues in Zimbabwe. Nevertheless, the organisation’s leaders were accused of embezzling funds from USAID meant to facilitate the voter registration mobilisation exercise. The funds were abused and the matter was referred to the ZRP and Zacc for further investigations. This exposes the demerits of the commercialisation of the struggle for democracy as it is an antithesis of the authentic functions of activism because it breeds illicit and criminal activities which also enhances corruption. Basically, activism is not supposed to be a money making scheme but an initiative that every progressive citizen must conduct as it promotes freedom of expression as well as the wider participation of the citizens in the politics and governance through constructive criticism which will enable the Government and policy makers to take notes. The conventional belief that is especially pinned in the minds of neo-liberal fanatics that activism is all about opposition, demeaning and discrediting the Government which is also a major factor that has facilitated the commercialisation of the struggle for democracy must also be shunned. However, activism can also serve as a golden platform for citizens to express their undying love for the republic and is also one of the windows that can be utilised to condemn corruption, sanctions, disunity and polarisation, among other ills. It is our juvenile submission that dependence on foreign aid led to ideological shifts among Zimbabwe activists and organisations leading to change in radical and leftists positions to secure funding. Hence true activism rests on local strategies to promote transformational possibilities and new participatory forms of democracy. Wallace Musakanyi and David Makora are Writers and Researchers who can be contacted on wallace.musakanyi@gmail.com and davidmakora@gmail.com