The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Reporter
PREPARATIONS for the Zimbabwe Music Awards (Zimas) taking place at the Newlands Country Club in Harare this Saturday are at an advanced stage with artistes rallying fans to vote for them. The awards will be held under the theme, “Rhythm, Roots and Cultural Diversity”. The event is set to be staged in a hybrid setup where there will be live streaming and physical attendance. The host city, which also played host to the inaugural Style Icon Zimbabwe Awards this past weekend, is certainly ready to host the glitzy event. Zima spokesperson Benjamin Nyandoro said the ceremony will be hosted by partners in everything; the inseparable radio personalities KVG and Phathisani. He said preparations for the event are at an advanced stage. “We’re more than ready for the awards ceremony as everything is going according to plan. Tonight (yesterday) we have a nominees cocktail party where nominees, organisers and our partners are set to come together,” Nyandoro said. By hosting the nominees’ cocktail party, Nyandoro said their hope is to create rapport between the awards’ partners and artistes for the possible forging of any opportunities going forward. He urged the public to continue casting their votes on the Zima website and their Facebook page for tracks nominated in the Song of The Year category. The songs are Rita by Baba Harare featuring Mai Titi, Kujata Jata by DT Bio Mudimba, Pombi by Freeman HKD, Handipere Power by Nutty O and Patati Patata by Roki featuring Kofi Olomide and Rayvanny. All eyes will be on the high-flying Nutty O whose Mustard Seed album saw him get seven nominations. The album contains songs such as Handipere Power and Safe that are doing well on radio charts.  His collaboration with Demarco on the song Ndiwe has also made him a crowd favourite. Nutty O is followed closely by Freeman with six nominations, with Roki bouncing back to the awards sphere with five nominations. DJ Zandimaz is tied on four nominations with Janet Manyowa while Tamy Moyo is tied on three nominations with fast-rising D.T BiO Mudimba of the Kujata Jata fame who surprised many by coming out tops in the Radio Zimbabwe Top 50 2021 chart. Hip-hop duo Crisswiss and The Dot continue to find their spot at awards as they are nominated in the Best Group/Duo category. Artistes to look out for at the awards include Ma9Nine and Skhosana Buhlungu who are making their debut appearance at Zima this year. Ma9Nine of the Chimuti hit is nominated in the Best Zimdancehall category with Sikhosana of the Dlala Ntethe fame being nominated in the Best Traditional Music category. Last year’s awards ceremony was held virtually due to the Covid-19 lockdown regulations. Jah Master’s Hello Mwari won song of the year while Fadza Mutengi a song by Poptain and Allanah clinched the best collaboration.