The Chronicle Harare Bureau
LEADING audit firm Ernst & Young, which has completed its consultancy report on the unbundling of Zesa, has recommended that the role of executive chairman be abolished at the State power utility. Zesa is currently headed by Dr Sydney Gata in an executive chairman capacity. He was first appointed to the helm of Zesa in 2 000, as chief executive, before becoming executive chair in 2003. Dr Gata left the state power utility in 2006 and returned in 2019, again assuming his previous role of executive chair, which attracted criticism from corporate governance experts. In what, however, indicates progress in the proposed unbundling of the power entity, Ernst & Young has completed its report on the unbundling, which now awaits Cabinet approval. Part of recommendations by Ernst & Young, commissioned to work with Zesa for the unbundling process, is that the utility should have nine non-executive board directors, including its chief executive, but headed by a non-executive chair. “For all the proposed designs, one board structure has been proposed. This is based on key governing regulations and guidelines,” the renowned global audit firm said. “As a minimum, three non-executive directors should be appointed to the board, the majority of them being independent. The board currently complies with these requirements and hence this structure can be maintained with any option chosen. “The company’s Chief Executive Officer (CEO) shall not also be the chairperson of the board hence separation is required.” Ernst & Young said according to the Companies and Other Business Entities Act every company shall have at least one secretary ordinarily resident in Zimbabwe. The audit firm said the company secretary may be a chartered accountant, a legal practitioner, a public accountant or public auditor. It also said the board of any public entity should establish an audit committee that has at least two independent board members. “The audit committee should be responsible for improving management reporting by overseeing audit functions, internal controls and the financial.” reporting process. Further, it recommended that the board shall establish an audit committee composed of at least two non-executive board members other than the chairperson of the board. Ernst & Young also recommended that the board shall also be expected to establish a risk management, technical, finance and remuneration committees. The campaign to separate the positions of CEO and chairman is rooted in the notion a stand-alone chairman can act as a counterweight to a stand-alone chief executive. Globally, it has become common for shareholders to attach more value to the quality of corporate governance structure through clear separation of powers. Zesa unbundled its operations in 2002 in a bid to improve efficiencies and leverage on economies of scale. This resulted in the formation of six companies, owned by a holdings group. But the Cabinet in 2018 directed its rebundling after noting that the structure had failed to yield the desired results as its implementers of the system did not understand it. This resulted in separated entities running from centralised control, leading to a lack of cohesion, which negatively affected the smooth and efficient running of the power utility.