The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Reporter
A new dawn has arisen for theatre practitioners as things are slowly getting back to normal through the hosting of live physical plays. For the past two years, the Covid-19 pandemic had been a huge blow to the theatre sector as creatives could not stage their plays as normal. But in the past weeks, Bulawayo has slowly been getting back to the yesteryear days with the Geraldine Roche Drama (GRD) competition taking place at the Zimbabwe Music Academy with theatre practitioners reigniting the fire at the Bulawayo Theatre. Chronicle Showbiz caught up with some theatre practitioners who expressed joy that the industry is slowly regaining its momentum. GRD project co-ordinator Khaliphile Sibanda said they are fully utilising the period to host events.  “We’re very happy that theatres have been reopened. I believe for us to be perfect for international stages, we need to practice at home. So the fact that theatres opened and we’re able to hold events is a relief. “We’re artistes and can only survive if we create awareness using our skills,” Sibanda said. Renowned filmmaker Raisedon Baya said it is now up to artistes to lure audiences back to the theatres. “The lockdown relaxation means that artistes who’ve been inactive for two years can now work. It also means audiences can attend events, but it’s not going to be easy as we have to give people good reasons to leave their homes and come watch the performances. “Artistes have to start building audiences again, it’s like starting from the beginning,” said Baya. Nationally-acclaimed film director Memory Kumbota said tapping into the digital space has not been a walk in the park for many. “Like any other activity, live theatre was hit hard by Covid-19 restrictions. As a way to adjust to the new normal, theatre had to be made for the digital space with some of it being performed for limited live audiences where that was permissible. “This hasn’t been easy as the total theatre experience is a live one,” he said. Concurring with what Baya said, Kumbota said building a sustainable theatre audience has always been their main goal, and going digital made their works to be seen far and wide although monetising that has not been easy. – @mthabisi_mthire