The Chronicle Blessing Karubwa, Business Reporter
SMALL to medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) should embrace brand positioning to enhance visibility in the market at a time when Covid-19 restrictions have frustrated normal business operations. Diamond Burry Enterprises’ managing director, Mr Nhlanhla Dabengwa, said this during a recent conference for SMEs capacitation held at a local hotel. Brand positioning simply refers to the conceptual space a company owns in the minds of its customers and how it stands apart from its competitors. It is conveyed through voice and tone, visual design and the way one’s company represents itself on social media, for instance. During the meeting, SMEs players drawn from different sectors raised a number of challenges affecting their operations and engaged with business experts on how to overcome them. Major challenges include lack of access to finance, access to markets, ability to penetrate exports and inability to financially sustain operations. “Today we were teaching the SMEs to have a brand position. We discussed four topics and these were about transformative leadership, financial hygiene, wealth creation and building a brand position that makes you compete in a global world,” said Mr Dabengwa. “From your structures and systems put in place until one gets to advertising, we advertise a business that exists. For a business to stand out in must meet needs, serve people’s wants. “Business is going global. We’re competing with the next person and it’s now all about how one is positioning themselves through giving a certain perception about their business.  “The world is globalising. How does one stand out from other companies as a SMEs — that’s positioning,” said Mr Dabengwa. Branch Manager for Utande Internet Service Provider, Mr Odiel Nkomo, says they were focusing on bringing in internet connectivity to support SMEs operations. He said Utande would be assisting with digital transformation as they offer Information Technology (IT) related services so that SMEs would be able to enter different portals and practice online banking. During the meeting SMEs were encouraged to enrol with the National Social Security Authority (Nssa) so as to benefit from available social protection facilities as well as contribute to wider national development. “All this (technology) will help you to do your Nssa returns as you can no longer go to Mhlahlandlela to do your returns. You can do that in the comfort of your office,” said Mr Nkomo. One of the SMEs players, Miss Mayibongwe Ncube, who is in the catering business hailed the event organisers for empowering them with critical information.