The Chronicle Blessing Karubwa/Lumbidzani Dima, Chronicle Reporters THE Zimbabwe United Passenger Company (Zupco) has increased fares for local routes, a hike it says was necessary to cover rising operational costs. In Bulawayo yesterday morning, most commuters were shocked after waking up to new transport fares as they had not seen the notice that had been circulating on social media platforms the previous day. This comes after the Zimbabwean dollar further weakened against the United States dollar at the weekly forex auction on Tuesday where it traded at ZW$120,5 to the green back. The Zupco fare increase was effected yesterday. The fare for buses covering distances of up to 20 km rose from ZW$50 to ZW$80, while kombis covering the same distance are now charging ZW$100 up from ZW$80. From 21 to 30 km, buses now charge ZW$100 from ZW$80, while kombis are now charging ZW$120 from ZW$100. Charges for the 31 to 40 km distance which are covered by buses increased to ZW$120 from ZW$100. In an interview, Zupco Chief Executive Officer (CEO) Mr Evaristo Madangwa said the increase was necessary to cover operational costs. “We need to keep the business going and continuously serve our customers so the slight increase in the bus fares is to cushion the operation of operational costs,” he said. The national coordinator of the Passenger Association of Zimbabwe, Mr Tafadzwa Goliath said despite the increase being slight, the company should have notified the public well in advance, not hours before. “The current fare increases are accommodative regarding the market trends. However, the cost of daily travelling remains exorbitant to the commuting public.  Zupco is using street rates to establish fare structures. At the same time, the withdrawal limit is going to affect transport savings. There is need for Zupco to notify its clients well in advance for these hikes as sudden changes impact on people’s savings and regulation of everyday programming,” he said. A vendor, Mr Themba Hlatshwayo from Lobengula West said the increase in transport costs will force them to increase prices of whatever they would be selling. “ZUPCO cannot compete with mshikashikas on increasing fares. What would be the point of having it then? People will now board any kombi that comes their way as the fees are now equal,” said Mr Hlatshwayo. Another vendor, Mrs Sthembiso Sibanda (37) said the increase in fares has been effected at a wrong time. “I don’t think the decision is right because we’re just trying to catch up with this ‘back to school’ issue. We’re trying to pay fees and levies for our children. We’re currently struggling financially; we don’t have much to cope with this situation. To make matters worse, forex fares were not changed, but our own currency fares have been hiked, a move which shows that the public service is now competing with black market,” he said