The Chronicle Sukulwenkosi Dube-Matutu, Chronicle Reporter
SIX irrigation schemes in Matabeleland South province will be rehabilitated this year under the Smallholder Irrigation Revitilisation Programme (SIRP) being implemented throughout the country. SIRP was launched in November 2017 and is funded by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD). Under the programme, Tshikwalakwala, Sebasa and Guyu irrigation schemes in Matabeleland South province have already been rehabilitated. The 65-hectare Tshikwalakwala Irrigation Scheme in Beitbridge had not been operational for 15 years while Sebasa Irrigation Scheme in Gwanda had also been lying idle for several years.  The six irrigation schemes set to be rehabilitated in the province this year are Silalatshani, Makwe, Mankonkoni, Rustlers, Thornville and Bambanani SIRP is part of efforts by Government to rehabilitate irrigation schemes to improve food and nutrition security and ensure attainment of Vision 2030. Under the Second Republic, Government is prioritising revival of the agricultural sector through the development of irrigation schemes. A number of irrigation schemes that had been lying idle in the province have been revived while some that were being underutilised have been capacitated and expanded. Investors through partnership with local farmers, have also assisted with resources and equipment to boost production. Matabeleland South acting provincial irrigation engineer Mr Sheperd Mpotekwa said works were underway at Silalatshani Irrigation in Insiza. He said the other five projects were at tendering stage. “This year we will be working on rehabilitating Silalatshani, Makwe, Mankonkoni, Rustlers, Bambanani and Thornville irrigation schemes. We hope to have concluded most of the works at these irrigations by end of the year. We have started working on Silalatshani Irrigation. This is the biggest project so far as it is 442 hectares and has 845 farmers,” he said. “We have repaired inlet and outlet valves at the dam which supplies the irrigation scheme and we are now working on the conveyance pipeline. We have managed to repair the infill dams,” said Mr Mpotekwa. He said Silalatshani Irrigation has been operating at less than half its capacity for many years because of a damaged water system. Mr Mpotekwa said Tshikwalakwala and Sebasa Irrigations were now fully operational and set to be commissioned soon.
He said farmers at Guyu Irrigation scheme had planted their first crop. Matabeleland South acting provincial agritex officer Mr Mkhunjulelwa Ndlovu said the SIRP project will go a long way in ensuring food and nutrition security. “The SIRP programme has already started changing lives in the province as evidenced by production at Tshikwalakwala, Sebasa and Guyu. If the programme covers all these remaining targeted irrigation schemes, food security will be enhanced. I would also like to urge farmers to ensure that they fully utilise this opportunity and maximise production,” he said. Matabeleland South falls under Region 4 and 5 and as such receives poor rains most of the time. This has made it difficult for farmers to engage in successful crop production under dryland cultivation. The province however has abundant water sources that could provide water for irrigation. — @DubeMatutu
Ends