The Chronicle Thandeka Moyo-Ndlovu, Senior Health Reporter THE Covid-19 pandemic is escalating the HIV and AIDs related mortality rate in Zimbabwe, which for a longest time had been on the downward trend, emphasising the need for vaccination among those living with HIV. Zimbabwe is among countries that have done fairly well in reducing Aids-related deaths and HIV infections in the region. While statistics from the National Aids Council (NAC) show that HIV deaths were around 22 000 in 2019, there has been an upward trend estimated to be at 24 000 in 2020 since the outbreak of Covid-19 locally. A study of over 15 000 cases of Covid-19 in people living with HIV carried out by the World Health Organisation found that people with HIV had a 30 percent higher risk of dying after admission to hospital with Covid-19 than people without HIV. Speaking during the Zimbabwe National HIV and Aids Strategic Plan (2021-2025) in Bulawayo yesterday, Nac monitoring and evaluation director, Mr Amon Mpofu, said Covid-19 had greatly affected programming. “Covid-19 had an impact on HIV programming in Zimbabwe and we are grateful that there was decline in new cases caused by social distancing and travel restrictions,” he said. “However, after working so hard to reduce deaths, our figures have been on the upward trend, we recorded increased mortality by the fact some had co-morbidities that exposed death,” said Mr Mpofu. “We need to be wary of Covid-19 as a threat to our goals, therefore, let’s continue to be vaccinated. People living with HIV should be vaccinated and all of us should continue washing hands, wearing masks so that we avoid Covid-19 at all costs as it can disturb our progress towards ending Aids by 2030.” Mr Mpofu said besides the progress, new infections among adolescent girls and key populations were also worrying. “We have noted that prevalence remains high in the southern region, which means we focus more on these areas and borders for us to be able to end Aids. “This strategy will also guide us in eliminating inequalities and other challenges as we brace ourselves to meet the 95-95-95 UNAIDS global targets,” he added. According to the target 95 percent of people within living with HIV should know their HIV status while 95 percent those should be put on Antiretroviral Therapy (ART) by 2025. The last 95 percent is targeted at ensuring that those who are on ART should achieve viral load suppression. Zimbabwe has managed to meet the 90-90-90 global targets and is now aiming for 95-95-95 by 2025. Out of the country’s estimated 1, 3 million people living with HIV, the percentage of those knowing their HIV status was estimated at 90 percent in 2018. The country has achieved and surpassed the second 90 now reported to be over 95 percent. Nac chief executive officer, Dr Bernard Madzima, said there is still the need to sustain the momentum and further scale up HIV prevention to achieve epidemic control. “There has been progress in the number of AIDS-related deaths, with a 60 percent decrease from 2010 to 22 000 in 2018. The number of new HIV infections has also decreased by 39 percent by 2018 from 63 000 in 2010,” he said. UNAIDS community support advisor, Mr Jeremia Manyika, said the organisation was pleased by the rate at which Zimbabwe had been achieving targets. He, however, bemoaned low uptake of HIV services by men saying some were succumbing to Aids as they delay presenting at health institutions. “Males are lagging behind in terms of accessing services for reasons that are largely patriarchal and the general belief that men are strong and can soldier on. We encourage them to take up services and despite their busy schedules fending for the families they should find time to go to health institutions. “We lobby for extended operational facilities and tailor-made services for men so that they can access these critical services. If we do not address this, we will continue losing men and it will not be good for our mortality and morbidity indicators.” — @thamamoe