The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
CENTRAL Soccer League table toppers Sheasham FC have played down the championship favourites tag heading into their ninth match of the season, saying they are taking each game as it comes. Coached by seasoned gaffer John Nyikadzino, who has previously won Premiership promotion with Chapungu and Nichrut, Sheasham top the table with 20 points from eight matches. Three former Premiership teams are breathing on the neck of Sheasham, with TelOne FC coached by former FC Platinum gaffer Tendai Chikuni, second on 18 points, while army side Tongogara are third with 16 points. Moses Chunga’s Chapungu are six points adrift of Sheasham. Nyikadzino predicts that the championship race will be tightly contested, with most clubs in the region having stable resources to challenge for the topflight ticket. Tomorrow Sheasham, who beat Bishopstone 3-0 last weekend, will be hoping to maintain their unbeaten run when they come up against ZPC Munyati at Gweru Sports Club. Munyati lie 11th on the log with eight points and are smarting from a 1-3 home defeat to FC Platinum Under-19.  “We’re playing well considering that we had spent a long time without active football due to Covid-19. It’s always good to be at the top at any given time, but as Sheasham, our focus is on building the team, nurturing talent and taking each game as it comes. We don’t want to put ourselves under unnecessary pressure by thinking of the championship. The title race is a marathon, there are a number teams with resources that can challenge for it,” said Nyikadzino. Ex-Hwange goalkeeper Prince Phiri, Spencer Ngwerume, formerly with Caps United, as well as David Mangezi, who joined from TelOne, have been powering Sheasham. Striker Liberty Masaure (22) has banged in six goals in eight games for Sheasham. Meanwhile, second placed TelOne will be home to Filabusi United at Ascot Stadium, while Tongogara visit Vumbachikwe in Matabeleland South and Chapungu visit Bishopstone on Sunday. Central Soccer League fixtures Tomorrow TelOne vs Filabusi (Ascot), Vumbachikwe vs Tongogara (Long John Stadium), Sheasham vs ZPC Munyati (Gweru Sports Club), Dulibadzimu United vs Loss Control (Rhonies Mabidi Stadium), Paramount FC vs MSU (ZRP Gokwe Centre)
Sunday
FC Platinum vs Kwekwe United (Mandava), Bishopstone vs Chapungu (Bishopstone)
-@ZililoR