The Chronicle Lumbidzani Dima, Chronicle Reporter
Bulawayo City Council (BCC) is set to take legal action against home owners whose perimeter walls have no weep holes as required by the Water Act. A weep hole is a passage for water to exit one’s yard. The decision to take legal action against people whose properties have no weep holes comes at a time when several homes in the city flooded following heavy rains on Thursday due to lack of weep holes. On the day, the Meteorological Services Department (MSD) said Bulawayo received 30mm of rain. The MSD said any rainfall amount that is above 30mm can sweep away a car. In a statement yesterday, BCC said whenever a perimeter wall is being constructed, the opening of weep holes should be prioritised in accordance with the Water Act. “Where boundary walls or fence, such as dura walls, block wall, masonry wall are constructed, a provision has to be made for natural drainage of storm water according to Section 78 (2) of the Water Act (Chapter 20:24). Residents must open weep holes as per Section 46 (2) of the Roads Act Chapter (13:18). Failure to comply with this order shall result in Bulawayo City Council taking legal action against you,” reads the statement. The city council said floods are a common hazard in Bulawayo and the country as a whole, mostly affecting local vulnerable communities and neighbourhoods, especially low-lying flood prone or risk areas. BCC rolled out flood preparedness measures for residents to follow before during and after a flood. “To prepare for a flood, install ‘check valves’ in sewer traps to prevent flood water from backing up into the drains of your home (a check valve is a device that only allows the flow of fluids in one direction). Construct barriers (levees, beams, floodwalls) to stop flood water from entering the building. Seal walls in basements with waterproofing compounds to avoid seepage,” the statement said. “If a flood occurs in your area, you should listen to the radio or television for information. Be aware that flash flooding can occur. If there is any possibility of a flash flood, move immediately to higher ground. Do not wait for instructions to move. Be aware of streams, drainage channels and other areas known to flood suddenly. Flash floods can occur in some areas with or without such typical warnings as rain clouds or heavy rain. If you must prepare to evacuate, you should move essential items to an upper floor if you have time. Turn off utilities at the main switches or valves if instructed to do so.  Disconnect electrical appliances. Do not touch electrical equipment if you are wet or standing in water. Never attempt to cross flooded streams and rivers.” Council said after a flood people should listen to news reports to learn whether supplied water is safe for drinking. They should also avoid flood waters as they may be contaminated or electrically charged from underground or downed power lines. It also said people must be cautious when entering buildings as there may be hidden damage in foundations. On Thursday, Bulawayo acting chief Fire officer Mr Linos Phiri said they received emergency calls after water entered into houses in a number of suburbs. “The brigade was called upon to open water channels to drain flooded yards in Romney Park suburb, Woodville, along Third Avenue, Holy Hollyhock Close to Harrisvale and Northlyne Clinic. We also attended to a house that was damaged by a tree in Makokoba surburb,” he said. Mr Phiri advised residents to move to higher ground or designated areas whenever flooding occurs.