The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
AS Zimbabwe intensifies its efforts to achieve its goal to end the Aids epidemic by 2030, a former Dynamos player living with HIV has challenged sportspersons to lead responsible lifestyles that help in creating HIV/Aids awareness. The 52-year-old Julius Chimuti (not his real name), said failure to handle fame associated with playing for a big club like Dynamos and reckless behaviour led to the demise of what looked like a promising career.  Opening up for the first time about his status at a National Aids Council workshop for Sports Journalists in Chinhoyi, Mashonaland West on Wednesday, Chimuti said he joined Dynamos in the 1990s, playing alongside DeMbare legends Masimba Dinyero, Kallisto Pasuwa, Memory Mucherehowa and Chamu Musanhu among others. Though he had shown great potential to scale heights at his former team, being at Dynamos, a club of choice for many brought all the “trouble” for him. At a later stage, he learnt the toxic side of his fame at Dynamos that had seen him being a darling to many fans, making new friends, getting to party long hours and also discovered his other side he didn’t know existed — the love for women. Chimuti had grown up in a small town, so in his youth, football mattered most but was not prepared for the move to Dynamos and the capital city. “Everyone saw the potential in me and when I moved to Dynamos, those I grew up under knew I was destined for greatness but alas, that was not to be. I loved it that I was afforded a chance to play for a big club like Dynamos, it was a dream come true but what I didn’t realise was that it came with lots of responsibilities. Just that I was a Dynamos player, everyone wanted to be with me and I found myself having the time of my life as I went with the flow. “I remember as we prepared for the Caf Champions League, we’d camp for two weeks at hotels in Harare, Bulawayo or Mutare to avoid distractions, but somehow, female supporters followed us to the hotels. They were great company then, but later on that fast life caught up with me as I tested positive for HIV,” said Chimuti. It was his friend at his hometown who suggested he gets tested for HIV after sharing that he hadn’t been feeling well, and the first sign that Chimuti wasn’t well was when he struggled with his then favourite smoke — dagga. “I used to drink and in terms of drugs, I took mbanje which most of the footballers loved and still love. So, this one time, I hadn’t been well for some time so I met a childhood friend who suggested I go to town and get tested for HIV. I remember the counsellor asking what I would do if the results came out positive and I said I’ll accept them and move on with my life. But when the results came positive, I felt my world crumbling. I began to reflect on my past and bitterness took over,” said Chimuti. He felt bitterness when he thought about a missed opportunity to play in South Africa after passing trials only to return home before signing a contract after getting news that his father was critically ill. Chimuti says some of the players (names supplied) he had gone with to South Africa had their careers scaling high, buying houses and driving nice cars yet he had nothing, only HIV, which made him angry. He was hurt that he had infected his darling wife with the virus and as he walked back home, he pondered on how he was going to spell out that he was HIV-positive. It was after about three days when he summoned his courage and together with his wife they went for voluntary testing and counselling at the New Start Centre. As a couple they then started taking ARVs, which they religiously take to this day. But regret and anger kept holding Chimuti until he decided to turn his soul to Jesus Christ. “Being born again gave me a fresh start. Regret and anger are all gone. I rediscovered my passion for football again and that anger I used to have when I saw football during the first years of me being HIV-positive disappeared. I’ve done coaching clinics and I’m a holder of the Zimbabwe Soccer Coaches Association (Zisca) Level Four certificate. Lack of resources have made it difficult for me to advance and do Caf coaching badges,” says Chimuti. He wants to make a difference. “It’s unfortunate that when we grew up there was never any HIV/Aids education or awareness provided to players. But now the information is there but are the footballers taking heed to it? My wish is that every club makes it a point that it takes time to educate the footballers from the time they are juniors so that they lead responsible lifestyles and be role models in their communities. “Also, I think it has taken me a long time to come out and share my story because of the stigma but I believe sharing is caring and footballers and other sports personalities will find reason to know their statuses by getting tested and using preventive measures,” said Chimuti. Zimbabwe Civil Liberties and Drug Network executive director Wilson Box said it is important for sports bodies to embark on massive education as 60 percent of people between the ages of 16 and 35 years are hooked on drugs. “Drug use leads to reckless behaviour. Altered judgment and inhibition caused by illicit drug use lead people to engage in impulsive and unsafe behaviours leading to the spread of HIV and Aids. “Treatment of drug users was key in fighting HIV and Aids. This fight requires participation of everyone and sport is one tool to carry awareness,” said Box. According to Zimbabwe Population-based HIV Impact Assessment survey (Zimphia 2020), the prevalence of HIV among adults was 12,9 percent, which corresponds to approximately 1,23 million adults in Zimbabwe living with HIV in 2020. Generally, the survey found that HIV prevalence was higher among women than men (15,3 percent vs 10,2 percent). Zimphia 2020 found that 86,8 percent of adults living with HIV were aware of their status and of those aware of their status, 97,0 percent were on antiretroviral treatment. Among those on treatment, 90,3 percent achieved viral load suppression.— @ZililoR