The Chronicle Chronicle Reporter
YAFM, a regional radio station in partnership with Great Dyke TV is set to launch the Great Dyke Investment Report on the 11th of March 2022 in Gweru. YAFM Head of Marketing Tsitsi Nauruma said that having observed that there is great business potential in the Great Dyke, they commissioned renowned economist Professor Gift Mugano to undertake a thorough study of investment opportunities within the region in order to guide potential investors. Nauruma said they are delighted that the report has been compiled and will be launched at the Great Dyke Mining and Agriculture Investment Conference and Awards in Gweru next month. “We are so excited to be launching the Great Dyke Investment report which is meant to highlight a number of investment opportunities within the Great Dyke region. “We assigned a trade economist with over nine years extensive experience ranging from research and publications, policy analysis, trade negotiations, advocacy, lecturing and consultancy, Professor Gift Mugano to do the report for us. “So we are going to be launching the report on the 11th of March at the Great Dyke Mining and Agriculture Investment Conference and Awards to be held in Gweru. “The guest of honour is the Minister of State for Provincial Affairs and Devolution in the Midlands Province Senator Larry Mavima. We are expecting a number of panellists including the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe Governor Dr John Mangudya to be present on the day,” she said.  According to Nauruma, they are also going to be honouring companies and individuals who made significant impact in the agriculture and mining value chains around the Great Dyke in 2021. “The awards promote excellence and aim to unlock the growth potential in mining and agricultural companies operating in the mineral rich geological complex called the Great Dyke, which trends from north to south for over 500 kilometres. “The awards were introduced after observing that there are no dedicated accolades for mining and agricultural entities operating in the Great Dyke and as a way to stimulate growth and achieve higher production,” she added. “We are calling out all investors within the mining and agricultural sectors to take this opportunity to network and meet with policy makers to discuss what needs to be done to increase investment within the Great Dyke region.” The Great Dyke is a linear geological feature that trends nearly north-south through the centre of Zimbabwe passing just to the west of Harare. It consists of a band of short, narrow ridges and hills which are rich in gold, platinum group Metals, chrome, nickel and other minerals.