The Chronicle Sikhulekelani Moyo, Business Reporter
A DISPUTE has erupted between Bulawayo Mining Company (BMC)’s How Mine and its former workers who claim they have not been paid their dues four years after they were retrenched on three months’ notice. Management says that workers have no valid case and insists that its actions were done in accordance with the law.
Following the July 17, 2015 Supreme Court ruling, employers now have the right to terminate a job employment contract by just giving the employee a three month-notice period without paying any retrenchment package. The development has led to a wave of dismissals. In the case of How Mine, 65 workers lost their jobs when they were retrenched in 2018. They have, however, been staying at the company-owned houses in the mining compound on the outskirts of Bulawayo until recently when management issued them notices to vacate the accommodation. On Friday a group of disgruntled former workers approached Chronicle to register their grievances. They said the retrenchment process was not done and communicated properly and the company was now reneging on paying the outstanding packages. “We were retrenched in 2018 and the procedures were not properly followed. We were not paid the full amounts that were agreed as packages,” said one of the workers. He said the workers were allowed to continue staying in the company houses awaiting payment of the outstanding packages. “We were therefore, shocked when the same company gave us eviction notices to leave their houses before payment. Right now, we are stranded and our children are not going to school,” said another worker. One of the workers said she served the company for close to 22 years and does not understand why she was retrenched. “The company is reported to be doing well and to confirm that the retrenchment was not justified, all our positions have been filled by new employees,” she said.  The workers appealed to the Government to intervene saying the company was being insensitive to their plight despite the many years of loyal service. Asked to comment on the allegations, BMC mine manager Mr Elton Gwatidzo said the retrenchment was done according to the law and said the affected workers had been paid in full. “In 2018, BMC embarked on a legal retrenchment exercise. The exercise was assessed by the relevant National Employment Council, which confirmed compliance with all requirements,” said Mr Gwatidzo. He said the company had paid the former employees in full and as such does not owe them anything. Mr Gwatidzo said the affected workers were given a grace period to stay in company houses and that period has expired hence the eviction notices. BMC is a subsidiary of Metallon Co-operation Group, which owns How Mine, Mazowe, Redwing and Shamva mines.