The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
FORMER Highlanders player and coach Methembe Ndlovu has landed a top role in the United States of America after being appointed as Trinity College men’s football team head coach. Trinity College plays in the New England Small College Athletic Conference (NESCAC). Ndlovu, the last coach to lead the Bulawayo giants to the Premier Soccer League title in 2006, joins Trinity College from Penn State University where he served as an associate head coach to their women team. Ndlovu takes over from Mike Pilger who retired from the dugout last season. “We are thrilled to welcome Methembe to the Bantam family and have him write a new chapter in the long and storied history of men’s soccer at Trinity College. “His personal history with the game is marked by success at every level. Methembe has a clear vision for our men’s soccer program that includes competitive success and the holistic development of our student-athletes. He is a skilled teacher and his passion for the game is contagious,” said Trinity College athletic director Drew Galbraith, speaking to www.bantamsports.com, Trinity College’s online publication. Ndlovu earned his Bachelor’s degree in Government from Dartmouth in 1997, where he starred on the pitch for the Big Green. He went on to a professional career that saw him spend six years with the Albuquerque Geckos, Highlanders and the Boston Bulldogs. In addition, Ndlovu earned nine international caps with the Warriors between 1997 and 1999. He started his coaching career as a player assistant coach with the Cape Cod Crusaders, then of the PDL, in 2002. In his first season as head coach in 2003, he led the Crusaders to the 2003 PDL National Championship. He then joined the PDL Indiana Invaders as general manager and head coach. A holder of the USSF B Licence, he was voted 2004 PDL National Coach of the Year. That year, Ndlovu also served as a volunteer assistant coach with the University of Notre Dame men’s soccer team under one of his mentors, the legendary Bobby Clark. Ndlovu was also the Zimbabwe National Under-20 men’s head coach from 2007 to 2010, and guided that squad to the Cosafa championship in 2007 and to the Cosafa silver medal in 2008. Ndlovu went on to found and serve as chief executive officer and technical director of Bantu Rovers Football Club for 10 years (2008-17). Tshintsha Guluva fostered sporting and academic excellence, sent players to professional leagues in Africa and beyond.