The Chronicle ZIMBABWE’S fastest growing short-term insurance company, Moovah, has introduced a tech-driven process to ensure fast and reliable settlement of claims for vehicles damaged through accidents. The non-life insurance firm, a part of EcoCash Holdings Zimbabwe, said the new service offers customers a more personalised service and enhanced touch points for smooth and speedy motor claims settlement.  “To make a vehicle insurance claim, motorists simply need to download a claim form from the Moovah website, complete it and email it and a copy of one’s drivers licence to Moovahclaims@ecocashholdings.co.zw. “Along with the form, the vehicle owner is also expected to attach a police report and three quotations from reputable panel beaters,” the company said. It added that the claim form can also be submitted via the Moovah mobile App, which can be downloaded from Google Play or from the Apple App Store.” The latest move will simplify the often cumbersome and time consuming, motor accident claim process, that has seen most motorists frustrated after they visit several offices to make claims after an accident. Before this innovation, it was mandatory to have the accident-damaged vehicle inspected pre and post repairs. Claim settlement typically happened after the repairs and submission of relevant documents to the workshop or inspector. Both the insurer and the insured had very little control over the whole process of confirming the liability after the repairs. But now, Moovah has simplified the process through segregation of smaller claims that can be treated differently at multiple touch points. This offers convenience, with significant savings in time and cost. Moovah, which has a high automation score of 88 percent and has managed to drive social inclusion through digital transformation, said it will continue to leverage technology, group synergies and an extensive agent network to improve its customer experience. “The insurance industry is in the midst of a digitally infused shake-up, where customers are increasingly embracing digital channels and technologies for their convenience. “At Moovah, we are moving with the times and transforming the insurance sector with our cutting-edge technology-driven solutions and products. We have embarked on a transformation journey to become a customer-centric, digitally enabled company that excels in the areas of customer experience, efficiency and effectiveness,” the company added. Moovah has three distinct vehicle insurance categories; Comprehensive, Third party and full Third-Party insurance cover. Comprehensive Cover is provided for accidental damage to the insured vehicle, third-party property and bodily injury for up to US$20 000. The insured vehicle is covered up to the insured value or market value. “This insurance covers your car if it’s damaged by hail, storms, falling trees or other acts of nature or through accident. There’s 24 hours roadside assistance countrywide, 365 days in the event of an accident from Automobile Association of Zimbabwe (AAZ), who are available on 0712 406 033, 0782 783 691 and 04-2932089. We also tow the vehicle to the nearest Econet Insurance inspection site/storage yard,” Moovah added. The short-term firm’s full Third-Party insurance covers damage or loss caused by fire or theft or attempted theft to the insured vehicle or its accessories. Third-party bodily injury and death is covered up to US$10  000 and third-party property damage up to US$10 000. At the same time, Moovah’s Third Party insurance covers liability for death or bodily injury to third party vehicles or third-party property. Third-party bodily injury and death is covered for up to US$3 000 and third-party property damage for up to US$2 000.