The Chronicle The court has reached a verdict regarding the dispute between TV presenter Katlego Maboe and ex-partner Monique Muller. The court has ruled in Katlego’s favour. A statement shared by Katlego on his social media read: “TV personality Mr Katlego Maboe was absolved by the Magistrates Court against allegations of alleged misconduct, made by the former partner Ms Monique Muller, in October 2020. The court agreed with the submission of a Point of a Limine from Maboe’s legal team, ruling that there were no grounds for obtaining the protection order. “Furthermore, the court has not made a finding of acts of domestic violence that were allegedly perpetrated against Ms Muller, and as such, the matter has been dismissed. This is a great victory for Mr Maboe, who has maintained his innocence throughout the two-year ordeal.” Katlego expressed gratitude to close friends and family who supported him through this time. “The most important thing to me is the wellbeing of my son, and unfortunately things have settled into a routine for him after being put through such a terrible and lengthy process,” he says. “I am so grateful to my friends and family, and my incredible team for the ongoing support, and to the justice system for ruling in  favour of the truth. I may never know or understand the real motive behind all of this destruction and heartache, but right now, I just want to focus on putting the pieces of my life back together,” Katlego says. In 2020, Katlego was taken off air after a video circulated of him confessing to cheating on his ex-partner Monique. She accused him of giving her an STI. He later released a statement on the matter.  “I was unfaithful to my partner during a very important time of our lives – an act I regret to this day. We are currently undergoing an unfortunate and painful separation which is being resolved through legal proceedings. As you can imagine, separations are quite a difficult thing to deal with, especially with a child involved,” he wrote. “In light of the comments made against me, I would like to state that I have never abused my partner. I have always and will always stand up against the abuse of women and children – in fact, the abuse of anyone for that matter. I had chosen to deal with this matter privately to protect and safeguard our child. At the end of the day, our child is all that matters to me. However, I will leave this to the legal system and let the truth have its day.” Cardova Productions, which is responsible for The Expresso Morning Show later released a statement stating that Katlego will not be appearing on the show until further notice. “Certain serious allegations have been posted on social media about Mr Katlego Maboe and, last night, a video was leaked showing Mr Maboe seemingly admitting to cheating on his partner. We have been informed that a legal process relating to the allegations is currently sub-judice. We condemn any acts of violence and mistreatment, especially against women and children, and therefore take such allegations very seriously. Until such time as the matter has been fully investigated, and pending the outcome, Mr Maboe will not be appearing on The Expresso Morning Show,” the statement read. Almost two years later, the matter has been concluded. He has, however, opened a harassment interdict against Monique’s brother. In the statement released by his management, they emphasised that Katlego has suffered reputational damage and loss of income. “Upon the news of the allegations in 2020, Mr Maboe has suffered devastating reputational damage, resulting in a loss of professional livelihood. This includes the cancellation of his contract with OUTsurance and a suspension from his long-term contract with SABC 3’s Expresso Morning Show. The loss of financial income has not been recovered since the start of the court battle. “Mr Maboe has a final harassment interdict granted against Ms Monique Muller’s brother, Seth Muller, who made damaging and unfounded allegations in support of Ms Muller’s claims. He is also pursuing legal action against Women for Changes founder, Sabrina Walter, and SA Film and Television Awards (SAFTAs) chairperson of the judges, Dr. Janet van Eeden, in this regard. A criminal charge of criminal defamation and untrue statements against Mr Maboe, which led to his removal as a SAFTAs nominee in the category of Best TV Presenter. She is expected to appear in court soon,” the statement reads. – News24