The Chronicle Angela Sibanda, Chronicle Reporter HAVING suffered from depression and relying on supportive friends and family for recovery, a young woman from Bulawayo has opened a gift shop to help people make their loved ones feel special or appreciated during special occasions or when they are going through tough times. Her gift packages come as menstrual kits, fruits, sweets and chocolates, flowers and toiletries. Most of her clients are Zimbabweans living outside the country who order gifts for their loved ones in the country for birthdays, anniversaries and other occasions. After graduating as an accountant at the National University of Science and Technology (Nust) last year, Ms Nombeko Matiba (25) has been making people feel loved and appreciated. Depression is a common and serious, but treatable medical illness that negatively affects how one feels, thinks and act. It causes feelings of sadness or a loss of interest in activities one once enjoyed. It can lead to a variety of emotional and physical problems and can decrease one’s ability to function at work and at home. Because of limited knowledge, many have taken their lives as most societies are ignorant of its signs. Ms Matiba has dedicated her time into helping people choose gifts for their loved ones as well as delivering them through her organisation popularly known as Noxy’s Basket of Happiness which she opened in February last year. In an interview, Ms Matiba said for her, it is not about what is being gifted, but it is more about how the gift is presented and delivered. “I have seen a lot of people break down and cry tears of joy when they receive these gifts. So, it is not really about the gift business, but interacting with people and seeing their happiness that actually makes it a worthy business. “Growing up, I have always loved giving gifts and it’s the reaction that they give that makes me feel good about myself,” she said. Like any other young woman, Ms Matiba has had her own share of heartbreaks from relationships and feeling all alone during hard times and it is from this background that she found motivation to venture into a business of seeing people smile.  “I went through a lot as a young lady, I have gone through some relationships failures and faced some situations where despite everyone claiming to be there for me, I actually felt all alone. As young people, we go through a lot of things that from an adult’s point of view might seem like a small issue but at the end, it affects how we think, respond and do things in our day-to-day lives,” she said. It was after going through depression that, Ms Matiba realised the power of gifts and giving to other people. “Whenever I was feeling down, I really appreciated the small things that came from my family and friends. I always get this feeling that makes me want to give and make someone feel the same way that I felt, and through my clients, I get the opportunity to hand over gifts to people who will be surprised and so happy to get the parcels and this also cheers me up,” she said. She said her aim is to provide locals with gifts that are on an international standard and cater for all age groups, functions and occasions. “I realised that most of the time we think gifting is just buying someone anything, but gifts have to be presentable with quality products and reputable brands and a particular packaging that appeals to the eye. “The gifts business has a lot of entrepreneurs who are trying to make ends meet, but it is when you take away the business aspect of it and make it a hobby of making people smile that you actually see the difference and impact these things have on people’s lives,” she said Among her gifts packs there are gifts for spouses, kids, graduation ceremonies, old age and the sick. “At some point a client asked me to deliver a parcel for her friend whose aunt had committed suicide. When I arrived, the recipient broke down and started crying in my arms. I ended up playing the role of her friend who was away. “So, these are some of the things that really motivate me to continue despite challenges that come because at the end of the day, I am somehow contributing in the fight against suicide and promoting mental health in a way,” Ms Matiba. She is currently working with three individuals whom she pays on commission and has donated to a number of charity homes and vulnerable individuals. “I am working with young people who are waiting to go to college. I only employ individuals who have just finished school as a way of promoting their creativity and teaching them to make extra cash during their college days. “Even though I feel like it’s not enough, I have donated to some charity homes and vulnerable individuals and when we don’t have enough money, we just set a date and go to spend time with them. I think it reduces loneliness and makes people feel appreciated, especially those in secluded communities such as old age homes,” said Ms Matiba.