The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
STAKEHOLDERS in the tourism industry have vowed to keep the iconic Victoria Falls in its pristine state as a World Heritage Site to protect the destination’s status. This comes as the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (Unesco) has deployed a team to assess the state of the destination and its environment in the wake of massive human developments that have taken place since it was declared a World Heritage Site in December 1989. The declaration was based on its unique geomorphologic formation and exceptional natural beauty and aesthetic importance of the falls. The majestic Victoria Falls, classified as the largest waterfall and one of the Seven Wonders of the world, is shared between Zambia and Zimbabwe, which are both signatories to the World Heritage Convention of 1972. There have been massive infrastructure developments either side of the Zambezi River, which divides Victoria Falls and Livingstone cities, as well as electricity generation activities and proposed Batoka Gorge Hydro Electric Scheme, which have raised concern about the future of the destination. Because of pressure from the tourism industry stakeholders, Unesco dispatched a team to assess the heritage site both in Livingstone and Victoria Falls. A report will be compiled and presented at the upcoming World Heritage Convention in June this year in Russia. The assessment will determine whether Victoria Falls continues as a listed World Heritage site, gets downgraded or red-listing, or is totally removed from the list. The team is led by Zambia National Commission for Unesco secretary-general, Mr Charles Ndakala and has been mandated to assess the effects of developments on the World Heritage site.  It will also assess whether the Batoka project will or will not affect the taita falcon bird and rafting activities due to backflow, benefits of the dam to poor communities and effects on tourism in general as well as whether environmental management agencies from both countries were involved in the Batoka Environmental Impact Assessment process. Environment, Climate, Tourism and Hospitality Industry deputy director (natural resources) Mr Tanyaradzwa Mundoga, who represented the ministry, said the industry is committed to balancing between development and conservation. Victoria Falls’ economy is solely dependent on tourism. “The team was sent to assess the potential impact of the threats since there are certain parameters to be followed in terms of the need to preserve tourism and value of the product,” he said. “The major issue on the table was the Batoka project and new resort on the Zambian side near the river. They are going to write a report to be presented at the Unesco World Heritage Convention. “We assured the team that we are going to balance development and conservation and will not allow anything that will jeopardise the pristine nature of the heritage site.” Zambezi River Authority officials also assured that rafting activities will not be affected by the Batoka project. Conservationist Mr Trever Lane said the engagements have been an eye opener to the industry and conservationists. He said any developments should ensure they stick to guidelines and not disturb the natural habitat while balancing between tourism and conservation. – @ncubeleon