The Chronicle JACOB was a farmer while Esau was a hunter. Between the two of them Jacob was most likely to leave an inheritance for his children and he did! Jacob’s descendants were the Israelites — God’s chosen people. Jacob, the farmer would not move from his home to work without planning first. Careful planning and sowing seed ensures a life of plenteousness in a farmer’s life.   Why is it that after unfortunate loss of a breadwinner in a family in some of our set-ups, relatives fight and scramble for the deceased’s possessions, and are able to possess them for themselves leaving the children with nothing? Family members have to run around last minute looking for money, borrowing or begging to pay for the funeral. What are you going to leave for your children? These are questions I want you to address prayerfully before we continue. A good man leaves an inheritance for his children’s children. Do you have something to write on your will? If a problem occurs now where do you go? Will you go into the bush that you are accustomed to or will you go to your bank account? If you want money where do you go? The seed is found in harvest, and a harvest in a seed, so if you eat your seed do not expect harvest at all because you did not sow anything. You cannot go to the farm expecting a harvest when you know that you have not sown anything, the same applies in the spirit. In Genesis 27: 5, Esau had to go to the bush to hunt for the meat that his father had requested because he did not have it at hand (he had not planned for an emergency), so that prolonged the period he was due for his blessing and he lost out. Jacob, the farmer, had his resources ready because he was a man that planned and that was how he got the blessing. When you are a hunter you are not certain of the date or time when you will get your miracle or money in your business because nothing is planned, you do things haphazardly. Farmers will always rule or be more superior to hunters because their life is planned and they have a guarantee that their miracle will come.