The Chronicle Deuteronomy 28:8
The LORD will send a blessing on your barns and on everything you put your hand to. The LORD your God will bless you in the land he is giving you. Defining Poverty
Reysh is a Hebrew word for poverty and it means a mind-set with a spirit that robs, dispossesses, destroys, consume and disinherit someone in a cunning way. It is not noticeable how it destroys people but it is very cunning. Ptocheia is a Greek word for poverty. In the Greek context this is a mind-set that causes one to be with lack, deprived, destitute, begging, and insufficient and one may end up in bondage. To me poverty was a brother failing to get food or 2 dollars to go to church until I started reading the Word of God. Poverty is a state of mind and not lack of resources or money. Poverty is a mentality embedded in the sub conscious mind that will develop over time through background based on a strong belief that you will never have enough money and you do not deserve money. Or money belongs to other people. Your mind-set will be fixed on a strong belief that everything is hard to get and it’s difficult to make money or get ahead with your career without someone to help you. The Lord is willing to lift the poor form the dust but for God to raise you, something has to be erased. It is not the will of God for us to be in poverty. God has pleasure when we are prospering and He is saddened when we are poor for his delight is in the prosperity of His Children. One does not suffer lack because of their country, or employer but one suffers lack because of a poverty mind- set. Programme your mind to what will yield positive fruits. People think that when someone whom they think is their hindrance is removed they will prosper not knowing what changes a person is a programmed mind-set that yields fruit. Make a bold decision today and declare that you don’t want the spirit of poverty. There is too much anointing for prosperity in the Kingdom of God, therefore change your mind-set, have faith, a vision and you will not see the anointing working for you.