The Chronicle Business Reporter
MULTI-award-winning African airline, Fastjet Zimbabwe, has announced the introduction of a direct flight between Victoria Falls and Maun in Botswana in June this year. The low-cost airline is scheduled to operate four times per week using its 50-seater Embraer ERJ145. “The airline announces that effective Thursday, 30 June 2022, it will introduce a new service between Victoria Falls in Zimbabwe and Maun in Botswana. “The new route is scheduled to operate four times a week on a Tuesday, Thursday, Saturday, and Sunday,” said Fastjet in a statement. It said its Embraer ERJ145 provides the versatility to build a sustainable regional network with the right-size capacity while offering customers comfortable seating with generous legroom. Fastjet Zimbabwe spokesperson, Mr Nunurai Ndawana, said they were excited to introduce direct flights between the two resort centres. “The airline is thrilled to introduce direct flights from Victoria Falls to Maun. “Using our Embraer ERJ145 aircraft, we believe this route will facilitate more travel between these two tourism capitals of Zimbabwe and Botswana,” he said. Mr Ndawana said the Victoria Falls-Maun route has for many years been only availed by private charter. Thus, he noted that through the latest direct connection, his organisation believes it would be able to spur tourism development and growth in the region. Fastjet Group chief operating officer, Donahue Cortes commented: “The Victoria Falls – Maun flight is the second new route being added onto the Fastjet regional network, with flights between Victoria Falls and Nelspruit Kruger Mpumalanga planned to launch ahead of the Easter travel period. “Despite the hard-wearing effects of the Covid-19 pandemic, the group remains dedicated to the recovery and growth of tourism in Zimbabwe, South Africa and Botswana, and to bringing further connectivity to the region”. Fastjet, which began flight operations in 2012, among others, has awards that include Leading African Low-Cost Carrier World Travel Awards 2016, 2017, 2018, 2019, 2020 and 2021, and Skytrax World Airline Awards Best Low-Cost Airline in Africa 2017 and 2019, and is in the top ten finalists for 2021. Currently, Fastjet connects the three major cities in Zimbabwe by flying between Harare and Victoria Falls and Harare and Bulawayo. In addition, the airline offers international flights from Harare, Bulawayo and Victoria Falls to Johannesburg in South Africa, and from Victoria Falls to Kruger Nelspruit Mpumalanga in South Africa. Since commencing operations, the airline has flown over 3,5 million passengers and has established itself as a reliable African airline brand, with a range of value-added products and services.