The Chronicle Fungai Muderere, Senior Sports Reporter ZIFA Bulawayo Province Junior League side Zebra Revolution have entered into a one-year partnership with Fudu Media Company owned by Sibanengi Ndebele, better known as DJ Mzoe. Tshabalala-based Zebra Revolution is a developmental project with Under-10s, Under-13s, Under-17s and Under-23s. It was established in 2018 and is owned by ex-Highlanders, Chicken Inn and FC Platinum forward Mkhokheli Dube. “It’s a one-year partnership with Fudu Media Company, which is meant to promote our boys through pictures and videos. The fact that our training sessions and matches can now be caught on camera by Fudu Media Company will further help us to market our boys. This is just the beginning and we are waiting to see how this relationship will benefit both of us. We are also working on other potential partnerships,” said Dube. DJ Mzoe, an ardent football follower, said he was happy to work with Zebra Revolution, adding that they will also supply refreshments for the budding football stars at their training sessions and on match days. “I’m happy to be in this kind of partnership.  Fudu Media Company will be marketing Zebra Revolution on social media through the use of pictures and videos. I’m personally too much into football and as such I saw it prudent to help out a developmental project because these junior players will be our future stars,” DJ Mzoe. Dube hung his boots in January after a career spanning more than 20 years. Dube also featured for American Major League Soccer (MLS) side New England Revolution between 2008 and 2011 before returning to play in the South African Premiership with AmaZulu in 2012. After a short stint in South Africa, he returned home and joined Chicken Inn in 2013 and was laid off mid-season in 2015 when the Gamecocks won their maiden Premier Soccer League (PSL) title. He signed for Bulawayo City when the local authority side was promoted into the PSL in 2016 and then caught the eye of FC Platinum coach Norman Mapeza, who signed him a year later. Dube, who first tasted Premiership success with Highlanders two decades ago in 2001 and 2002, celebrated other PSL titles with FC Platinum in 2017, 2018 and 2019. He is also a holder of a Brazilian Soccer Institute (BFUT) coaching certificate, CAF C Licence and a Zifa Level 3 coaching badge. – @FungaiMuderere