The Chronicle GOD is ready to release blessings in people’s lives, but you have to know what to do first in order to get blessings in the spirit.  1. You must first honour your father in a double way. 2 Kings 2:12
And Elisha saw it, and he cried out, “My father, my father, the chariot of Israel and its horsemen!” So he saw him no more. And he took hold of his own clothes and tore them into two pieces. (NKJV) 2. First bind the “strong man.”
Mark 3:27
No one can enter a strong man’s house and plunder his goods, unless he first binds the strong man. And then he will plunder his house. (NKJV) Every battle is won in the spirit first then it pronounces itself in the physical. Whatever endeavour or project you may plan to undertake, in a particular area, you have to deal with its territorial demons first. This is because every demon has a territory that it reports to and every business has demons that operate in it. You cannot prosper in a certain territory before you spiritually conquer that place. You need to conquer that world then you become an authority without competition. If you want to start a powerful business you must bind the strong man in that territory. 3. Seek first the kingdom of God and His righteousness.
Matthew 6:33
But seek first the kingdom of God and His righteousness, and all these things shall be added to you. (NKJV) Seeking the Kingdom of God first is a process which many people are not willing to follow because it is everyone’s temptation to seek after present physical gratification. When you view things from a kingdom perspective, you are speaking of a king and his domain and subjects meaning that every kingdom has its culture, its precepts and rules that govern it. The above scripture simply indicates the pathway to living the prosperous life that we all desire. Which is, for you to get the end product you have to go through the process of seeking the kingdom of God first and having a kingdom mindset. God is creating capacity within you for Him to be able to add things into your life, without the things destroying you to an extent that you lose the kingdom.
G od Bless. — eaglelifeassembly@yahoo.com