The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Chronicle Reporter
GOVERNMENT has suspended for three months without pay teachers who have not been reporting for duty since schools opened on Monday. Some teachers’ unions declared incapacitation last Friday citing inadequate salaries.  According to the Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education, at least 60 percent of teachers reported for duty on Tuesday countrywide. However, Government raised concern over the barring of learners from accessing schools. In some learning institutions, pupils were sent away as teachers demanded to be paid their salaries in forex. In a statement the Minister of Primary and Secondary Education, Dr Evelyn Ndlovu said: “The Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education would like to inform the nation and its valued stakeholders that all officials within the ministry who absented themselves from duty since the official opening of schools on 7 February 2022 have been suspended without pay forthwith, for a period of three months. “During this period of suspension, members are not to hinder or interfere with any investigation or evidence relating to the alleged misconduct. Appropriate action will be taken against members who abrogate their duties and responsibilities. The ministry remains committed to the provision of quality, affordable, accessible, relevant, equitable, inclusive and wholesome education for all Zimbabweans.” Zimta president Mr Richard Gundani said they were in talks with Government over the statement and will release their position today. “We are engaging the Ministers of Education and Labour following up on the issues of remuneration package as well as of the statement that they (Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education) released on the suspension. So we will release the response to that tomorrow (today),” said Mr Gundani, who is also the Apex Council team leader. Progressive Teachers’ Union of Zimbabwe secretary-general Mr Raymond Majongwe said they would wait for each and every teacher’s day at the hearings. On Tuesday Treasury announced a 20 percent salary increase for all civil servants plus an additional US$100 cash allowance, as well as school fees allowance among other non-monetary benefits. — Follow on Twitter @bonganinkunzi