The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili, Chronicle Reporter
GOVERNMENT has procured new equipment worth US$6 million to facilitate replacement of obsolete radar network systems at the country’s airports starting next month. Civil works for the installation of the radar system have already been undertaken ahead of the arrival of the new equipment.
The radars will be installed at the Robert Gabriel International Airport in Harare, Joshua Mqabuko Nkomo International Airport in Bulawayo, Victoria Falls International Airport, Buffalo Range Airport in Masvingo and Kariba Airport. The existing radar network has outlived its lifespan with some of the equipment now prone to inefficiencies resulting in unreliable outcomes.  Meteorological Services Department director, Mrs Rebecca Manzowa, revealed that the Government has procured the new radar network during the National Climate Outlook Forum (Nacof) Review 2021/2022 on Monday. The meeting was meant to review how the rainy season has progressed so far and looking at the MSD’s projections to see if these were achieved. “We are so grateful that the department is at an advanced stage towards setting up a radar network. It’s been several years since 2016 and now in the fairness of time we are talking about it being a reality,” said Mrs Manzowa. “We are expecting the arrival of our first radars in the country by the end of March. Civil works for the first sites have been completed. “So, this is exciting news for us as the MSD. We are grateful that this project was well undertaken by the Government of Zimbabwe.” She said the first installation will be in Harare followed by the Joshua Mqabuko Nkomo International Airport and Buffalo Range. “There are two that will be coming to complete our radar network. So, watch the space and you will have them by June. Between the third and fourth quarter our radar network will be complete,” said Mrs Manzowa. She said the department was in the process of installing additional automatic weather stations, rain gauges and will soon be launching an SMS weather update platform. Elaborating on the same issue, Agriculture Meteorologist Mr Benjamin Kwenda said the five radars will provide data for the whole country. “We actually received a cumulative total of around US$6 million for the whole radar system. The other one will be stationed at the Robert Mugabe International Airport, Joshua Mqabuko International Airport, Buffalo Range International Airport and the fifth one will be at the Kariba Airport,” said Mr Kwenda. He said through the radar system MSD will be in a position to make accurate weather projections, which are critical for the aviation and agriculture industries. “Radars work in what we call narrowcasting, they allow us to pick events within a short space of time. They give us granular details, for example, if we are to receive a huge storm, they will tell us the amount of rain that we are supposed to receive,” he said. “From the five stations they will be able to cover the whole country,” he said. — @nqotshili