The Chronicle Mbulelo Mpofu, Showbiz Reporter
LOCAL fashion entrepreneurs have been presented with an opportunity to showcase their textile acumen continentally as the Fashionomics Africa contest is calling for submissions for its second edition after successfully hosting its inaugural competition last year. Zimbabwe is among some of the continental countries eligible to submit applications for Fashionomics Africa Contest 2022. The period to submit proposals began on the 14th of January 2022 and will extend to 14th of February 2022. The evaluation criteria will focus more on two things, the quality of the sustainable products designed and also the environmental-friendliness and innovativeness of the products made and sold by the entrepreneur.  A statement released by organisers of the competition read: “If you are an African designer and a fashion entrepreneur over 18 years old, based in Africa, operating in the textile, apparel or accessories industry and you have launched a fashion business (with a maximum of 50 employees), submit your proposal.” Fashion companies will have to submit their proposals via the organisation’s website. The public will vote between 15 March, 2022 and 30 April, 2022 with a professional jury set to announce the finalists before 1 April, 2022. The winner is to be announced during the week of May 9, 2022. Last year, a women-led Kenya shoe design house came up trumps and became the inaugural winner of the competition. This year’s overall winner will pocket US$3 000 for the best sustainable and innovative design, a Fashionomics Africa certificate; access to a network of media insiders and industry experts; the possibility to take part in online events and share insights on key sustainability challenges facing the industry; the publication of the winner’s story and 400-word blog on the African Development Bank’s website and Fashionomics Africa platform. They will also have access to mentoring and networking opportunities.
Two finalists will win a financial reward of US$1 500 among other prizes. The Fashionomics Africa competition, a combination of fashion and its economics aims to support African fashion entrepreneurs to develop sustainable and circular brands and to strengthen the innovative alternatives emerging in the fashion sphere. It is a challenge prize run by the African Development Bank, in collaboration with the United Nations Environment Programme, Parsons School of Design, Ellen MacArthur Foundation and BPCM. The main purpose of the competition is to highlight the continent’s talented and audacious entrepreneurs who are disrupting the fashion world by placing sustainability at the heart of their design and production. Our country houses some of the finest fashion brands which include Rumbidzayi Fashions, Charumbira Fashion Tailors and Designers, Maita Marimo, Amanda Moyo, Bridget Minenhle Nyathi just to name a few and all these have an opportunity to bring the gong home. – @eMKlass_49.