The Chronicle Midlands Bureau Chief
HARARE-headquartered Almin Metal Industries Limited has opened its fourth branch in Gweru and is set to open two additional outlets next month in Kwekwe and Mutare. Already the company has two branches in Harare and Bulawayo. Founded in 1969, the company is involved in the manufacturing and supply of aluminium profiles for architecture, irrigation and general engineering purposes. It owns and operates an aluminium extrusion facility in Harare, the only one in Zimbabwe and has vertically integrated aluminium processing capabilities comprising an extrusion plant and metal finishing operations such as anodizing and powder coating. The opening of the Gweru branch on Tuesday has raised optimism regarding the growth of the property development sector, which consumed most of the company’s products. Recently, there has been a surge in construction of houses and commercial buildings in Gweru and Almin Metal Industries Limited hopes to ride on this to drive the “Buy Zimbabwe” campaign to another level as the materials are locally made. Gweru deputy mayor Councillor Cleopas Shiri commended Almin Metal Industries Limited for investing in the Midlands capital and in other local authorities. “As Gweru City Council, we are proud to have you here. We are excited that you opened a new branch, which is a welcome investment for us,” he said.  “We are saying Gweru is open for investment and we cherish any investment coming our way.” Clr Shiri said it is the role of the local authority to attract investments. “Investment adds revenue to the local council, locals are employed and they pay rates and services meaning we therefore grow the domestic income that feeds into the gross domestic product,” he said. Almin Metal Industries Limited chief operating officer Mr Mark Saunders said Gweru was the heart of the country hence well positioned to be the network and interlink for customers across the country. He said the new investment would boost the construction industry in terms of supplies. “We are in Gweru today opening a branch. Gweru is the heart of the country and it will assist us grow. Plans are underway to open branches in Kwekwe and Mutare in the next month or so,” said Mr Saunders. He said with the boom in the construction industry, aluminium products were also taking over. “We are anticipating growth of the aluminium products from windows to doors, irrigation, solar mounting systems and general engineering,” said Mr Saunders. “We are a local company, making local products and we are pushing the Buy Zimbabwe, buy local mantra because our products are original, they are strong and cheap. When people buy local, they  also assist in the growth of the construction industry and other line industries for the growth of the economy.”