The Chronicle Mbulelo Mpofu, Showbiz Reporter
MANY times, Zimbabweans disagree on a lot of things, but one glue that sticks most (if not all) of us is the hardships that the month of January brings. One way or the other, we, each year, feel the pinch of the dreaded “January Disease”. It’s hard, if not impossible to suggest spoiling yourself during this nightmarish month but also, it poses an opportunity to let loose and enjoy the fruits of your hard labour. Surely, spending a little to spoil yourself isn’t that bad and a survey on the streets of Bulawayo by Saturday Leisure showed that people welcome the idea of spoiling themselves with their first dose of financial injection for the year. Now, before we get to the nuts and bolts of what people stated as the one thing they religiously buy for themselves on their payday to spoil themselves, let’s get one thing straight, spoiling yourself doesn’t mean going overboard and being a spendthrift. Most of the people have received their first paycheck for the year and already have a plan on how they will spend it. A variety of responses were said when the question: “What is the one thing you religiously buy on payday to spoil yourself?” was asked. One Nomazulu Ncube said she was definitely getting the heels that she saw the other day. “In as much as January was hard, I want to begin the month of February with a bang. I’m so in love with shoes and that’s the best way I’ll say goodbye to January,” she said. Nobuhle Zondo was not holding anything back as she said she will be munching away with Chicken Inn’s Munchie Mondays where one gets an extra piece for the price of two. “To be honest with you, I’m a foodie and what’s a payday without Chicken Inn’s Munchie Mondays? To me, there are no two ways about it. I’m definitely going all out this month-end and I’ll also take advantage of Pizza Inn’s Terrific Tuesday,” she said. Brian Banda said that he will drown his sorrows with a bottle of the wise waters. “I’ll not lie. I’ll get myself a bottle of whisky, rum, or brandy. I’ll unwind with my friends with a bottle of alcohol while listening to Amapiano in my house,” was his response.  Nomsa Phiri who defined herself as a workaholic proposed the idea of pampering herself with some manicure and pedicure in a spa. “I worked my socks off this past month trying to make ends meet so there’s a need to take care of my body. There’s only one way to do so which is going to a spa. I’ll definitely go and get my nails done and relax. “I’ve waited weeks for that check to come my way, working long stressful hours at work so it’s all I can do to unwind,” she said. One individual who preferred anonymity said that he will pump up the volume because he will be playing “I’m so paid” by Senegalese music icon Akon. “I’m all about music and I’ll be playing my favourite song, I’m so paid to celebrate payday with my friends. We’re a loud bunch and we’ll be throwing money around since I work for an NGO and we get US dollars. I rightfully earned this money so I need to celebrate the way I see fit,” he said. Another resident Nkululeko Mpofu said he will try his luck with sporting bets so that he can spoil himself with “something meaningful”. “For me, it’s about buying something huge and I want to try my luck and buy a Honda Fit. I know it may sound crazy saying that just after January, but I believe it’s doable. Riding high on a new vehicle will be the right fit for me,” he chuckled. Not everyone subscribes to the idea of pampering themselves with their paychecks as some thought the idea was “not necessary” given the hard conditions we are living under. Some cited debts they accumulated the previous year as reasons for limited spending, especially looking at the fact that schools will be open next week and one has to save for that time. So, what’s the one thing that you religiously buy on your payday? I believe that everyone has something that they cannot do without. That one that satiates their thirst and hunger. A lot of responses we got bordered around materialistic things, but there was a class which mentioned things like acquiring a certain skill and subscribing to a certain programme so as to better their lives. Let’s continue the conversation on social media. – @eMKlass_49