The Chronicle Mkhululi Ncube, Chronicle Reporter A 37-year-old Gwambe man in Bulilima District, Matabeleland South province fatally attacked his father with a hammer, axe and knife on Saturday afternoon and the motive is unknown. The incident has left the community which of late is recording an increase in violent crimes, in fear. The suspect, Godknows Moyo who is also said to have a rape case pending in South Africa vanished from the area after committing the murder and is on the run. Chief Kandana in whose jurisdiction the murder occurred said he was shocked about the latest violent crime to happen in his area. He said the deceased was Saul Moyo (68). “Yinsindabaphenduli yendaba (we cannot explain this). I do not understand why one would go to the extent of killing his father. F rom what I gather he used an axe, a hammer and a knife as he had injuries on the head and neck. It is difficult to understand what the dispute was about as there were no witnesses when the murder occurred. We are now living in fear and we hope police will be able to apprehend him soon,” he said. “Due to the increasing violent crimes, last week I invited the provincial crime committee and both the deceased and the suspect attended the meeting. Then for this to happen just less than a week after the crime awareness it is sad.” The chief said the wave of crime sweeping through the area was now a serious cause for concern as police are still to apprehend another suspect Mxolisi Ncube (34) from nearby Mbila village who allegedly attacked two women, leaving them for dead last month. A neighbour to the now-deceased in the latest murder case, Mr Xolile Nkomo said the deceased had hammer injuries on the back of his head and knife injuries as well. “The accused had left the family homestead on Friday around 5pm to an unknown destination and only returned the following day in the afternoon. At around 2pm the mother of the accused Mrs Agnes Moyo (66) left home to fetch water and left the deceased in his bedroom by himself and when she returned around 2:30pm she met her son coming out of the homestead with a blood-stained okapi knife.  “The accused told his mother in Kalanga language that ‘Ndabulaya tate’ (I have killed my father). This prompted Agness to retreat before entering the yard and she proceeded to a neighbour’s homestead where she met the mother of the deceased Thandazile Ndebele (85). She explained to her what the accused person had told her,” he said. Mr Nkomo said the two then proceeded to the deceased’s homestead where upon their arrival they saw the bedroom door wide open and discovered the body of the deceased lying on the floor in a pool of blood with no signs of life. Gwambe Ward Two councillor, Melusi Nkomo said they were working with police to set up a police base in the ward.He said violent crimes have of late been on the increase in the area. “People are now living in fear because the suspects are out there and we do not know what they will do next. We are working with police to set up a police base in the ward so that police are close to the community,” he said. Matabeleland South Provincial Police spokesperson, Inspector Loveness Mangena confirmed the incident. “The matter was reported to police who attended the scene. We are concerned with violent crimes happening in the area and just last week on Tuesday we were doing a crime awareness in the area. We continue to urge people to resolve their disputes in a peaceful manner,” she said.–@themkhust