The Chronicle Lumbidzani Dima, Chronicle Reporter
Mr Nigel Chakanyuka has been dealing with a lot ever since he lost his foot in 2011. He said most of his dreams were shattered and the situation that he is in, limits him in his day to day and life decisions. A 23-year-old man from Bulawayo’s Mahatshula suburb has been living with an amputated foot for a decade now, after an unfortunate accident just after writing his Grade 7 examinations in 2011. The young man attended Rhodes Estate Preparatory School (REPS) in Matobo where he greatly contributed to the athletics team, since he was a speed merchant. He proceeded to Matopo High School and finished his national certificate in polymer technology at the Bulawayo Polytechnic last year. He is currently studying towards a diploma in the same course. “The ordeal happened when I was waiting for my Grade 7 results in 2011, and it shattered my dreams. I had dreams of becoming a professional sports person as I was a gifted member of the REPS long distance athletics team and a keen soccer protégé at Young Flying Stars Academy. I know dreams change as one grows, but what I’m sure of is that in whatever academic profession I would have found myself in, I would have pursued this dream of mine on the side, or even made it my career,” said Mr Chakanyuka. He said the loss of his foot has limited his choice in choosing courses, as he had to choose a course that has a career that does not demand him to stand for long hours. Mr Chakanyuka narrated what happened on the day when he lost his foot, and the challenges he has faced due to that. “The traffic lights were not functional, and a Bakers Inn truck approached the traffic lights along 23rd avenue going eastwards from Plumtree Road. The driver decided not to give precedence to a vehicle driven by a Mr Moloi coming from Burnside going North into town. Young me was at the side of the traffic light waiting for the road to clear so that I could cross. The two vehicles had a collision and the Bakers Inn truck fell on the side hitting the traffic light, which then fell onto me crushing the right side of the body,” he said. “At the end, I was hospitalised. I underwent three surgeries, debridement, amputation and grafting. I lost a foot, and I still have permanent scars on my face. The three surgeries cost more than US$20 000.  “This whole thing of losing a foot has even affected my social life, as I have faced discrimination in the long run mostly at school. People wouldn’t want to play with me. At home, my nine-year-old sister runs away when I remove this prosthetic leg, because it scares her. I understand her since she is a child but sometimes it makes me feel different from other people.” Mr Chakanyuka said he did not want people to know about his condition for a very long time, but he has come to terms with it and accepted that it won’t change. “I did not want people to know, because I feared discrimination. I used to play chess at Matopo high, I can also swim, so I just left athletics and concentrated on chess. The only girlfriend I ever had dumped me when I told her about the prosthesis. I did not hide it from her. I wanted to tell her when I was ready, then I told her and she dumped me there and then. She actually did not suspect that I don’t have a foot. So, for now I’m not searching for a girlfriend. “I’ve just realised that I should not care about what people say about me, so I no longer hide my condition, it’s part of my life. I’ll carry it with me wherever I go, so whether I hide it or not, nothing will change, I’ve learnt to accept it,” said Mr Chakanyuka. Even if his family was financially stable by then, it really strained them. At the time when their son underwent those surgeries, the medical aid scheme was not accepted. Therefore, they had to dispose of their assets, some of which they could never replace, and used all of their savings for the procedures, up to a point when they had to buy the prosthesis. “At first, I was using crutches, but when I had totally healed, I started using the prosthetic leg which currently costs US$4000. I’m now using the second one. These things get worn out, so now I need another one,” said Mr Chakanyuka. He said when his parents approached Bakers Inn for some sort of compensation they did not comply, and up to now the matter is still in court. “They actually dismissed their driver for negligent driving, but then they said they are not responsible for this situation. If they found their driver guilty it means they know that they are guilty. They have denied all the responsibility. The case is still open at the magistrate court, there was no judgement or sentencing from then up to now,” said Mr Chakanyuka. Chronicle could not immediately get a comment from Bakers Inn last night.