The Chronicle Yoliswa Dube-Moyo, Matabeleland South Bureau Chief
The Ntepe-Manama Community Radio Trust is on course to reaching its target of going on air by April as they have made significant strides towards setting up their broadcasting studio. The Community Radio Trust was last year given a list of recommendations by Broadcasting Authority of Zimbabwe (BAZ) engineers to turn a section of the Manama Bible School into a studio before equipment can be handed over to them. Part of the renovation work included putting up sound proof walls, aluminum doors as well as installing a high traffic carpet and a broadcasting desk.  Government recently issued licences in all broadcasting categories to diversify information dissemination and foster development in all spheres of society. To demonstrate its commitment, Government has been opening up all categories of licences including free to air, commercial and community radio stations. Ntepe-Manama Community Radio Trust programmes officer Ms Siphathisiwe Ncube said the station is committed to meeting its April target. “The BAZ prescribed desk is being worked on while the aluminum doors and glasses have been purchased. We’re now waiting for the high traffic carpet and sound proof walls to be installed before BAZ can deliver the equipment then we go on air. We’re looking forward to be on air by April,” said Ms Ncube. She said the station has been experiencing financial constraints and appealed to various stakeholders for assistance in reaching their goal. “Funds from the community have not been trickling in as we hoped as farmers are busy on their fields. Gathering resources has been a bit of a challenge for us so we’re also appealing to organisations and locals who can assist in purchasing the prescribed material by BAZ so that we don’t miss the April deadline. The equipment for Studio A is already at the BAZ offices while the equipment for Studio B has been purchased and is awaiting clearance from South Africa,” said Ms Ncube. Meanwhile, the country’s ongoing digitalisation project will see the revamping of the FM network in Gwanda through high-powered transmitters which will cover a radius of about 80 to 120km. Currently, the services in Gwanda cover a 40km radius. BAZ acting chief executive officer Mr Matthew Chakanyuka said one of the mandates of BAZ was to make sure that people have universal access to broadcasting services. “What we’ve done to address the issue of coverage is to make sure that communities residing towards the border areas where there are challenges of reception of radio and television services get coverage. As a regulator, we checked for those communities and decided to give them licences of a community nature that’s why in this area, we’ve made sure that there’s a community radio station for the Ntepe-Manama area. “Secondly, under the digitalisation project, we’re going to revamp the FM network. Currently, the services in Gwanda cover a radius of 40km. Under the digitalisation project, we’re going to put high powered transmitters which will cover a radius of about 80 to 120km depending on the terrain,” said Mr Chakanyuka. The migration from analogue broadcasting to digital terrestrial television began in 2015. The digitalisation process is in compliance with international requirements. The main reason for the world’s migration to digital is to release valuable spectrum which can be used for other services. Spectrum is scarce therefore more efficient use of the spectrum is necessary if more terrestrial telecommunications and broadcasting services are to be made available. – @Yolisswa