The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter 
GERMANY-based instructor Karl Günter Lange says his main goal at the ongoing Level 2 long and middle distance running course that he is conducting at White City Stadium is to ensure coaches take a scientific approach in their methods. The course got underway on Monday and runs till February 7. The course is focusing on theory application, development of a training programme, biomechanics, physiology and psychology, and has attracted 15 coaches, 10 from Zimbabwe, two from Botswana and three from Zambia. Two of the 15 participants are ladies. “I am happy to have the opportunity to be here to do practical lessons. Remember this has not been possible in the last two years owing to the (Covid-19) pandemic. l am optimistic that I can convince this group to apply smarter training by applying sports science. A lot of the content in this course is science,” said Lange. “Honestly, l’m pleased with what l have seen from the group in these two days.The quantity and quality of questions indicate that they are interested in learning. The big problem we normally face is coaches knowing and understanding what needs to be done, but failing to apply it. I am hoping that from here this group will go on to apply what they have learnt. “I have the impression that this group will not take too long to implement what they have learnt. I think you will see very soon some positive quality changes in training, especially for those Under-20s. In athletics results are not measured by winning titles at junior level, but going on to win at the Olympics in years to come.” Meanwhile, Bulawayo Athletics Board will run a two-day basic coaching course aimed at uplifting and empowering upcoming coaches in the city. The Course fee is pegged at US$20 and runs from February 5 to 6 at White City Stadium. Bab is also set to host the National Track and Field Championships, which would be contested in the 100m, 200m, 400m, 1 500m, 3 000m, 100m hurdles, 110m hurdles, 400m hurdles, 4×100m, triple jump, long jump, high jump, shot put and discus, on February 5. – @innocentskizoe