The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Reporter
RISING tourism and hospitality concern, Club Likoma, together with Zimparks will tonight host a Valentine’s Day dinner at the acclaimed Matobo Hills world heritage site. The event dubbed Queen Lozikeyi Valentine’s Dance, according to organisers will be a unique one. Club Likoma’s Jonathan Kaliyathi said they partnered with Zimparks to host a memorable outing in the heart of a world heritage site. He said the idea behind the event has more to do with promoting a culture of touring the country’s destinations among couples and families.  “If we’re to be serious with promoting our tourist destinations, we have to start with such an event. It’s a Valentine’s Day dinner dance at Matobo National Park that we’re hosting in conjunction with ZimParks. “Lovers will get to enjoy the serene environment of the Maleme lodges inside the park and engage in activities that will make their day so memorable,” Kaliyathi said. While there has been an outcry over the high-priced tourism packages that are out of reach for many, Kaliyathi said today’s event suits every pocket. “We’ve come up with three different packages, namely the Njelele, Pomongwe and Lozikeyi. Njelele is designed for couples who may not want to spend the night in the park, but are looking to dine and wine in its environs on the special day while the Pomongwe and the Lozikeyi packages offer accommodation for two at the chalets and lodges. “The Lozikeyi and Pomongwe packages include high tea, dinner and dance, bed and breakfast, cocktails and a champagne breakfast as well as accommodation for the night. The difference between the two packages is that the guests in the former will be accommodated in a lodge while guests for the latter will be accommodated in the chalets,” he said. In a first for the southern region, ZimParks has committed to build beneficial partnerships with private players like Club Likoma so as to revive domestic tourism. Already, they have partnered a private player to revive the Sailing Club and the move is paying off. This has been viewed as a step in the right direction in support of the #ZimBho #Vakatsha campaign that is being spearheaded by the Zimbabwe Tourism Authority. – @mthabisi_mthire