The Chronicle Mbulelo Mpofu, Showbiz Reporter
If you have hit the streets of Bulawayo in the evening and gone club hopping, there is a face that you have most definitely come across especially at BAC Leisure, one of the city’s most hip nightspots. This is none other than Rethusaneng “Ree” Mabuka who is the proprietor of BAC Leisure. It is rare to patronise the club and not see him interacting with patrons and doing his rounds as he is an active manager. Tomorrow, he will be in a party mode as he will be celebrating his birthday and promoters in the city have made sure that he gets a memorable bash. To celebrate him, a star-studded line up of artistes, both local and regional have been invited to perform at BAC Leisure on Sunday. The birthday party that is being organised by events management agency, 3D Events will see the mogul celebrate his birthday with South African Amapiano star, Adiwele hit-maker Young Stunna as well as DJ Zandimaz, Nutty O, POY, Fab G and MC Joe Tha OG. On the decks will be BAC Leisure resident DJs as well as 3D Family DJs. 3D Events Management managing director Mduduzi “Mdu” Mdlongwa said it is an honour to celebrate another year added to Ree’s life. “It’s an honour to be hosting Ree’s party on Sunday as he’s one of the best in the business. This is going to be a special party where music will be in abundance with different artistes billed to perform at the event. “Having one of the most sought-after artistes in the form of Young Stunna is the cherry on top,” said Mdu.  “It’s always admirable to appreciate business associates and celebrating their birthdays is one way of achieving that. We also appreciate our local acts who’ll perform at the party celebrations.” It seems the city is more than ready to celebrate with Ree as a lot of people are looking forward to witness the Adiwele hit-maker live in action. Nutty O’s manager, Diana Nheera was ecstatic about the party and confirmed the Handipere Power singer’s availability. “Bulawayo, we’re coming through to support Ree’s birthday party and interact with Bulawayo creatives so expect fireworks from our side,” said Nheera. – @eMKlass_49