The Chronicle Thupeyo Muleya, Beitbridge Bureau
Government has availed $90 million for the construction of a new concrete reinforced Siyoka Bridge, a vital link to Beitbridge West constituency and the rest of the country. Accessing parts of Wards 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12 had become a nightmare for motorists and members of the community following the destruction by heavy rains of a causeway along the Makhado to Whunga road in January last year. According to the 2012 census, the six wards have each an average population of 6 000 people. The new bridge is being constructed by the District Development Fund (DDF) as part of the amplified Emergency Road Rehabilitation Programme (ERRP). DDF acting director for engineering services, Goodwell Mapako said the bridge would cost an estimated US$2,5 million ($300 million). “After the collapse of the Siyoka causeway, it became prudent that we construct a better structure so that we keep all areas connected around Beitbridge district and Matabeleland South province,” he said. “The old structure gave in to the effects of weather and it is now history, but it has given us an opportunity to build back better. We have identified a suitable site where we are still carrying out ground investigations and we intend to build a reinforced concrete bridge which is actually different from the causeway that collapsed across the river”. Engineer Mapako said so far, they had received $90 million to start the project and that they expect to get more funds. He said with funds available, they will complete the project in the next 12 months. Engineers and road technicians, he said, were already on the ground.  “We want to build a high-level bridge, which we hope when we have constructed that bridge will make sure that the flood level of Mtshabezi River, is well below the deck of the bridge. “Our idea is to build an all-weather bridge during and off the rainy season. At the same time, we look forward to hiring the bulk of the local labour from surrounding villages,” said Eng Mapako. The Deputy Minister for Home Affairs and Cultural Heritage, Cde Ruth Maboyi, who is also Beitbridge West MP said the collapse of the Siyoka Causeway had brought agony to villagers in her constituency. She said it was important for DDF to give the project all the attention it deserves considering the key role it played in enhancing the area’s economic development. “Our economy here largely depends on livestock production and the state of affairs is affecting the community’s access to key markets or even procuring the necessary implements. Communities here have had to endure the pain of failing to access key amenities either in Beitbridge or the rest of the country because they have been cut off at Mtshabezi River,” she said. The Deputy Minister commended President Mnangagwa for initiating the ERRP. She said the program will help improve the state of roads in most rural, urban, and highways which have been extensively damaged by successive climate-related disasters.