The Chronicle Midlands Bureau Chief
THE Zimbabwe National Water Authority (Zinwa) has embarked on a massive water disconnection exercise in a bid to recover over $400 million it is owed by its clients.
The water disconnection exercise is targeting schools, parastatals, mines, churches and businesses whose accounts are in arrears. Zinwa corporate communications and marketing manager Mrs Marjorie Munyonga said some of the debts have been outstanding for several months.  “Zinwa is embarking on a massive water disconnection exercise targeting schools, institutions, parastatals, mines, churches and businesses whose accounts are in arrears as the Authority moves to recover monies that these categories of clients owe. “These institutions owe Zinwa a combined $400 680 033 in unpaid bills as at December 31, 2021; with some of the debts being outstanding for several months,” she said. Mrs Munyonga said the disconnection exercise is part of several measures that Zinwa is instituting to try and recover the over $2 billion it is owed by various clients that also include domestic users, local authorities and farmers. She said some of the measures the water authority is undertaking to recover outstanding amounts include litigation and the engagement of owing consumers. “This non-payment of water bills by these various clients has adversely affected Zinwa’s capability to fully and effectively execute its mandate as the revenue collected from water users is required for the procurement of key water resources management inputs such as water treatment chemicals, spares, fuel, electricity, the payment of suppliers and the honouring of statutory obligations such as taxes and levies,” said Mrs Munyonga. She urged all clients whose accounts are not up-to-date to settle their bills or to approach their respective service centres and present acceptable payment plans to avoid the inconveniences associated with the disconnection of water supplies. “Clients outside categories targeted by the current disconnection exercise are also urged to ensure that they settle whatever they are owing to Zinwa. Zinwa reiterates that there always exists an inseparable relationship between payment for water and service delivery. When clients do not pay for the services they receive from Zinwa, it becomes extremely difficult for the Authority to sustainably provide service,” said Mrs Munyonga.