The Chronicle Yoliswa Dube-Moyo, Matabeleland South Bureau Chief People with disabilities are more vulnerable to gender-based violence and sexual abuse in addition to stigma and discrimination in rural communities. In Zimbabwe, spousal abuse is the most common form of GBV with women being the main victims. Authorities are on record saying GBV cases rose during the Covid-19-induced lockdowns as men and women were literally locked down together. The closure of industries and loss of jobs, it was noted, fuelled friction within families. Speaking during a disability sensitisation meeting with villagers in Ward 18, one of the facilitators Ms Kwanele Ramachela, said there was need to protect people with disabilities, particularly children with disabilities. “We tend to think that GBV happens to the so-called able-bodied and we hasten to take action but what about those with disabilities who cannot speak for themselves or walk to report that they have been abused. What are we doing as a community in protecting our children with disabilities against the people who take advantage of them. People with disabilities are more vulnerable to all forms of gender based violence; let’s learn to differentiate what is wrong and right for the betterment of our communities,” said Ms Ramachela. Echoing her sentiments, Nkomwa Foundation Trust director Mr Pick Nkomwa said people with disabilities represent one of the most marginalised minority groups in the world hence their needs and concerns are commonly swept under the carpet. “Disability is not a new phenomenon, it has been there since time immemorial and everyone has the responsibility to ensure that people with disabilities are uplifted and supported.  People with disabilities encounter various challenges in our communities and these include non-acceptance by family and society, lack of identity documents, gender based violence, lack of sanitary pads for young women and girls, clothing, inaccessible public buildings and lack of assistive aids for full enjoyment of their rights,” said Mr Nkomwa. He said it was important to erode misconceptions about disability and create an enabling environment where people with disabilities can showcase their abilities. “Section 22 of the Constitution of Zimbabwe states that all people with disabilities are to be treated with respect and dignity, they should be assisted in achieving their full potential and minimise disadvantages suffered by them.” Meanwhile, the Government last year started paying education and medical bills for people living with disabilities following the establishment of a new policy. Funds for that purpose have already been released and intended beneficiaries are required to register with the Department of Social Welfare. Deputy Minister of Public Service, Labour and Social Welfare Cde Lovemore Matuke said Government, through the new policy, has adopted all health and medical expenses for those with disabilities. He bemoaned attitudes exhibited by some in society and urged people to change their attitudes towards people with disabilities saying disability does not mean inability and no one is immune to disability. “In Shona they say ‘seka urema wafa’ (no one is immune to disability) this clearly tells us that none of us is immune to disability, therefore, we must all collectively change our behaviour towards the way we care for the disabled. These people are able to work for themselves and all they need is to be encouraged and afforded equal opportunities,” said Cde Matuke. He said it is the President’s wish through his Government that all citizens regardless of their condition have equal access to resources and opportunities including education and health.– @Yolisswa.