The Chronicle The Echad principle Echad talks of power and importance. Deuteronomy 6:4 Hear, O Israel: the LORD our God (is) one LORD. NKJV
The Hebrew in that verse is pronounced as follows: Sh’ma Yis’ra’eil Adonai Eloheinu Adonai echad
Echad is derived from the shema — a prayer recited daily at the Israel wall. The very last word in the Sh’ma is the Hebrew word “echad.” That word is rendered as “one” in most English translations of the Bible. The straightforward, common sense, understanding of echad in the Sh’ma tells us that only “one” person is Almighty God and that one person is our heavenly father — Yawheh. The above is the most important verse to Hebrew people. Echad refers to “Number 1,” God is Alpha and Omega, meaning that He is Echad, which means the first and that is the position of God. It also means something done or in existence occurring before anything else. More important than anything else; a number of priority, importance, or urgency. God deserves to come first in every area of your life. Romans 8:35 Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? (NKJV) God must always come first, anything else is idolatry that can attract curses in your life. Deuteronomy 6:4 “Hear, O Israel: The LORD our God, the LORD is one! (NKJV) 1 Corinthians 9:24 Do you not know that those who run in a race all run, but one receives the prize?  Run in such a way that you may obtain it. (NKJV) Do you know that those who run in a race all run but there is one that receives the prize? The one that finishes in first place is the person that is celebrated, respected and rewarded more than others. You receive a gold medal when you come first. The reaction that the first person gets reflects the acknowledgement of the effort put in that race because to win a race, to come first requires hard work. When you hit that number you hit the echad and you touch God. God Bless. — eaglelifeassembly@yahoo.com