The Chronicle VAYA Technologies has introduced a new, fuel-efficient vehicle-tracking and fleet management solution that enables real-time visibility of mobile assets to create cost savings, operational efficiencies and allow for informed business decisions. Mr Givemore Jojo, VAYA Technologies Zimbabwe CEO, said the advanced predictive fuel management solution was designed to assist large, medium and small businesses optimise fuel consumption, boosting revenues and maximising profits.  “We are excited to launch our unique fuel management solution, which is the first widely available fuel management service that automates decisions on optimal fuelling, and so help to achieve great savings on one of the most significant fleet management costs,” he said. Fuel costs are a major part of operational costs for logistics and fleet management businesses. They can be as high as 60% of the total cost of operations. Mr Jojo said it was therefore imperative that key metrics for this significant cost driver, such as fuel used per unit time, is closely monitored and tracked. The service will offer the highest level of fuel security, accountability and control while at the same time accurately capturing data without the driver’s intervention. It will also provide realtime tracking, driver safety, remote immobilisation, trip reports and geofencing. “With the introduction of this new technology, we want to help businesses optimise their total cost of ownership in the highly competitive transportation and logistics sector. It is our latest contribution to enabling the industry achieve leaner, greener and safer operations across the transport ecosystem.” Mr Jojo said the fuel monitoring solution will bring transparency and accountability to logistics companies, fuel service stations and other firms that use heavy duty generators, by tracking fuel costs, illicit fuel siphoning and pilferage, and reducing inaccurate readings. “With fuel theft on the rise, it can be challenging to know if all your fuel transactions are legitimate purchases from authorised vehicles in your fleet. Without properly tracking data to understand which vehicles are at which stations at what times, there can be a lot of guesswork involved in confirming fuel purchase history. This can cause fraudulent expenses, that might be difficult or too time-consuming to verify. Our solution addresses all these challenges,” Mr Jojo said. He added that companies and individuals would benefit from improved fuel efficiency, which helps to prevent fuel waste. “When you track vehicle maintenance and driver routes, you can utilise this data to make cost-effective decisions, such as implementing more efficient driving routes and encouraging better driver behaviour, both of which will improve fuel efficiency,” he said. He said part of the solution included high precision fuel level sensors and robust devices that deliver consistently high accuracy in even the harshest conditions, adding that the company also offered state-of-the-art, real time web-based software, with SMS and email alerts, along with a highly trained team of installers, to help clients with installations, including customised post-installation reports, to suit specific customer needs.