The Chronicle Lumbidzani Dima, Chronicle Reporter FOREIGNERS who have not been vaccinated against Covid-19 are no longer allowed into Botswana, the neighbouring country’s government has said. In a statement directed to the public and the international community, Botswana’s Ministry of Health and Wellness said there will be some changes at all its ports of entry to reduce the risk of imported Covid-19 cases into the country. The statement also said all returning Botswana nationals who have not yet been vaccinated must be vaccinated or risk being fined or imprisoned. The ministry said those who are not fully vaccinated will also be required to present a 72-hour negative PCR Covid-19 test and undergo vaccination at the port of entry, which will be facilitated by the respective ministry. “All persons entering Botswana should show proof that they have been fully vaccinated. Fully vaccinated means having taken two doses of a two-dose vaccine regimen or single dose of the Johnson and Johnson vaccine. If one has taken any of the two and is overdue for booster shots, they are no longer regarded as fully vaccinated, until they have taken the booster shot,” reads the statement. “If one has no proof of being fully vaccinated, is not willing to be vaccinated at the port of entry, has no 72-hour negative PCR test result and is not willing to be tested at own cost, they will not be allowed entry into Botswana if they are foreigners.   they are citizens, they will be liable to a fine of P5 000.00 or imprisonment not exceeding one year or both.” The ministry said proof of being fully vaccinated is now the most important requirement for entry into Botswana. It said if a person fails to produce proof of being fully vaccinated and has no 72-hour negative PCR test result, they will be charged for Covid-19 testing at ports of entry. “They will be required to undergo PCR testing at their own cost and where necessary quarantine at their own cost, while waiting for results. If results are negative, they will be allowed into the country. If results are positive, they will be allowed to isolate within the district of the port of entry, at their own cost,” read the statement.