The Chronicle Songstress Lira is one of the most decorated and most powerful South African female stars. Over the years, she has proven that she knows her story inside out. After leaving 999, a record label owned by Arthur Mafokate, she returned to the industry in 2006 looking matured and purposeful. Lira, born Lerato Molapo, crafted her own sound and style that is backed by a sassy voice and relatable songs that have quickly elevated her to a star and earned her legions of fans. Nineteen years later, Lira has released six blockbuster albums that have achieved platinum status and has awards to show for it. Now that she has accomplished her mission in South Africa, Lira has her eyes set on being a world superstar. Her mission began when she signed with an American recording company in 2014. In 2019, she was a judge in the American show The World’s Best. The 43-year-old further performed at one of the parties hosted prior to the Grammy Awards taking place. Next month, she is jetting off to Germany where she has shows. It is that experience and success that has inspired Lira to join My Mastery programme alongside David Tlale, Bonang Mohale and Marc Lottering. The My Mastery concept originated overseas and was initiated by businessman Richard Rayne in a bid to use successful South Africans to inspire and educate others. In the project, which is available online and can be viewed by anyone in Africa, Lira shares the ins and out of the industry. Through the videos, she touches on topics like the signing of contracts, how to save money, how to discover your own purpose in music, and the importance of mental wellness. As she chats to Sowetan about master classes, Lira explains that she is baring it all because she knows what it’s like to have a gift and knowing where to go. She points out that a lot of artistees were super-talented but did not know how to make it work when it comes to business. “This is something I have always wanted to do. In my mastery I have, I am sharing what I have learned from the industry and how to have a lasting career. First thing, you have to find your purpose and ask yourself why you are doing music. “A lot of people pursue a career in entertainment but the attitude is wrong. They seem to be giving music a chance and not sure if it will work or not,” she says.  “If you are not sure, you are going to leave room to fail. Society always tells you music is not secure or a proper career. Meanwhile, there are people who are thriving as musicians and what is the difference between you and them? What I love about the industry is that there is a formula. There is also no limit to how well you can do. If you have the guts and willingness you can do well.” The singer guarantees that the information she shares in videos is something that can never be taught at school. With celebrities known for living large, Lira has added tips on how to save money. As someone who comes from an accounting background, Lira took a decision to structure her finances when her career began. “When I started in the industry I created a salary for myself to cut the bad spending habits. I knew that paying myself a salary will force me to save and budget. I wanted to cut this overspending that is caused by accessing big money at once. I know South African artistees make money but struggle to save. “I encourage people to establish first what they want in the music industry. If you are here for money, let that be your goal. However, If you are trying to share your God-given talent and you want longevity your approach should be different,” she says. As a seasoned musician who came up with her own thing, Lira emphasises the importance of uniqueness. She argues that there is enough space for all musicians to explore. “A long as you are clear and not trying to be someone else you will find an audience . . . You have to determine your audience. You can’t get into the industry and hope for the best.” She says artistes depend on what people say and think of them, which puts them at the mercy of others. “But you need to learn to cultivate yourself even if you did not get gratification. When it is your season . . . ride on it, create a legacy and nurture things that are important to you like friends and family. I have realised that many artistes do not have a grounded structure, they go looking for love out there. The public will never give you love.” Covid-19 lockdown gave Lira time to rest because she has been overworking herself. Prior to Covid-19, Lira was spending a lot of her time in Los Angeles performing at shows. In August 2019, international doll-making company Matell launched Africa’s first Barbie doll made in the likeness of Lira to commemorate Barbie brand’s 60th anniversary. She also took her band on a tour of the US and shot the entire experience, thus creating four seasons of her documentary series called Lira-Dream Chaser which was aired to 50 countries on FOX. Lira last recorded her album in 2016 and is not rushing to release another one. – Sowetan