The Chronicle Today marks 26 years since the death of rhumba legend Ndux Malax. In memory of the late star, Chronicle Showbiz invited his son, Witness Malaba aka Ndux Junior to pen an article remembering his father. Below is the article:
My father was a rhumba legend, icon, pioneer, music ambassador, and a great musician who laid the foundation for many rhumba artistes. Had it not been for his death on this day in 1996, I believe he would have continued enthralling his fans with great music. I was only 12 years old when he died so my memories of him are not many but in my own way, I’m trying my level best, in an industry that has transformed a lot since his death, to keep his legacy alive. Ever since owning a cellphone, I have used only one ringtone, my dad’s hit song Isiphiwo Sami because he saw my talent and anointed me to continue with the work he was doing. One day, I sneaked out to watch one of his shows that was held at Matokonye near our village and I jumped on stage and danced even though I was fearful that he would reprimand me for coming to the show. But to my surprise, he was so happy and showered me with a lot of money which I later used to buy new tennis shoes. I remember vividly, his last show that was held at our homestead in Kezi. He gave me the mic after I had danced so well and I sang a song that I cannot recall, but people were so happy. I was placed on top of a drum as I was too short for people to see me in action and he introduced me to the crowd. I believe that was his way of passing the music mic to me.  At that same show, my father performed one of the songs with the lyrics: “Dlala Mntanami, yilo ilifa lakho engikushiyela lona (dance my son, this is what I’m leaving for you,’’ hence when I recorded my first album, I composed the song ‘Sikhumbul’ubaba’. It was during early 1995 when I started seeing changes in my father’s body and that affected me a lot, even at a tender age. I remember breaking down and by December of that year, he could no longer perform. The band had to perform at some shows without him. They would attend shows and he would remain at his Nkulumane house in Bulawayo as he could no longer be on stage. Ndux Malax was a very busy man as he was always on the road for music shows throughout the year. I do not remember him taking leave, he was only stopped by being bedridden. We only saw and interacted with him at a few family gatherings. He was much loved by fans, even outside the country, especially in Botswana where he had a huge fan base. Even up to now when I go to perform in Botswana, they still demand that we play the songs that he sang in Setswana like Lorato and many others. His music touched on many themes and he was a great educator using music and I look forward to continuing with his legacy.