The Chronicle Sikhulekelani Moyo, Business Reporter
GIANT beverages producer, Schweppes Zimbabwe Limited has been issued with a 25-year licence to generate solar energy for its own consumption by the Zimbabwe Energy and Regulatory Authority (Zera). The company had applied for a licence to construct and operate a new 564kw solar plant at its Beitbridge Juice Factory. The new licence will expire on 25 January 2047.  “The generation licence is hereby granted to Schweppes Zimbabwe Limited hereinafter referred to as the licensee in terms of Section 42 of the Electricity Act to construct, own, operate and maintain 564kw photovoltaic power plant called Schweppes BBJ factory solar plant at Schweppes Beitbridge Juicing Factory, Mazunga Estate, Beitbridge, Matabeleland South Province for the purposes of generation and supply of electricity for own consumption but connected to the grid,” reads part of the licence signed by Zera chief executive officer, Mr Eddington Mazambani. “Subject to the Electricity Act and the terms and conditions of the licence, the licence shall generate electricity for captive power for use by Schweppes Zimbabwe Limited.” The company already operates a 1MW solar plant, which was commissioned in 2019 at the company’s Willowvale plant in Harare. Solar power generation has come in handy for most businesses by reducing negative impacts brought by power cuts and is regarded as clean energy as it has no gaseous emissions. The new Schweppes solar power plant will be connected to the national grid through the Mazunga 33,11kilovolts substation. Schweppes is one of the five big companies which registered with Zera for independent power production between 2019 and 2020. Meanwhile, the Government has been working towards reducing power import bill by embarking on power generation projects that will make Zimbabwe a net power exporter. Zera has licensed 60 independent power producers since June 2019 and the number continues to grow as many players keep on applying for the licences. – @SikhulekelaniM1.