The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
KEY figures suspended by the under-fire Felton Kamambo Zifa board disregarded suspensions announced by the association’s beleaguered executive and went about their business as the Premier Soccer League continued with its programme, while another set of administrators is preparing the Mighty Warriors for the Africa Women’s Cup of Nations. The Premiership programme went ahead smoothly at the weekend, while Kamambo and board member for finance Philemon Machana spent the weekend in police cells. Kamambo, Machana, Bryton Malandule and Stanley Chapeta instructed Joseph Mamutse to suspend PSL chief executive officer Kennedy Ndebele, acting Zifa chief executive officer Xolisani Gwesela and national teams’ general manager Wellington Mpandare, accusing them of plotting to topple the board. A number of Zifa councilors calling for an extraordinary EGM received suspension letters from Mamutse. The Zifa board has been trying to defy its suspension by the Sports and Recreation Commission (SRC), and even calling on Fifa to ban Zimbabwe. As a sign that Kamambo and his cronies have lost grip, three league games went ahead with Ndebele superintending the PSL secretariat in organising the outstanding Premiership matches in Bulawayo and Mutare. Chicken Inn beat Tenax CS FC 3-0 at Luveve Stadium on Saturday, with Bulawayo Chiefs stunning champions FC Platinum 2-0 at the same venue, while Black Rhinos and Caps United drew 1-1.  Gwesela and Mpandare have been busy working on the Mighty Warriors’ Africa Women’s Cup of Nations qualifier against Botswana. Zimbabwe play host to Botswana on Friday at the National Sports Stadium before travelling to Francistown for a return fixture on Wednesday next week. Mpandare said all is set for the Mighty Warriors’ Friday match, adding that they are planning travelling logistics for the return leg. “We’re working hard to make sure that the Mighty Warriors have flawless preparations. Two foreign-based players Rudo Neshamba and Danai Bobo arrived on Monday and we’re expecting Immaculate Msipa and Berita Kabwe tomorrow. “We’re also having a meeting to discuss travelling plans for the return leg. There are two flights per week from Johannesburg to Francistown, meaning we might have to fly the Mighty Warriors to Bulawayo and drive to Francistown after a two-day stopover in Bulawayo,” said Mpandare. He expressed gratitude to the SRC for ensuring that the Mighty Warriors have flawless preparations. “The Sports and Recreation Commission has really been doing their best to make sure that the team has everything it needs to prepare for the games. This has afforded the players and coaches with nothing else to worry about, but concentrate on the impending match.” – @ZililoR