The Chronicle CLEAN City Africa has called on all Zimbabweans to properly manage waste disposal during the rainy season to prevent the spread of waterborne diseases, such as cholera, typhoid and dysentery. Zimbabwe often experiences higher cases of waterborne diseases during the rainy seasons, as garbage piles up in many suburbs and communities, with households struggling with effective waste disposal. But Clean City chief executive officer (CEO) Mr Lovemore Nyatsine this week warned of disease outbreaks, if waste and garbage is left to fester in public places, amid the onset of an above-average rainy season. “Some of the circumstances that create health hazards in our communities occur due to the inadequate or negligent handling of garbage,” he said. “These can lead to the spread of infectious diseases, bad smells and environmental contamination, especially among water bodies, swamps and temporary pools forming due to the rains.” Mr Nyatsine said during this time of the year (the rainy season) there is a proliferation of vendors selling fruit and foodstuffs such as mangoes, wild loquat (mazhanje) and road-side roasted mealies, among others, which if not properly handled, become health hazards. “It’s, therefore, critical for individuals to be responsible with the waste they generate to ensure that our environment remains clean. “And this is where we (Clean City) can help. We have the tools and expertise to handle all kinds of waste, and dispose of it safely” he said. Clean City, which has to date decommissioned over 812 illegal dump sites across the country, is Zimbabwe’s leader in waste management; waste collection and recycling, bulk water deliveries, household and office cleaning, as well as fumigation and disinfection services. The company, an EcoCash Holdings Zimbabwe subsidiary, was established to help municipalities and households to address problems of water, sanitation, safety and security with the goal of keeping our environment clean and safe. Mr Nyatsine said Clean City, in partnerships with communities, municipalities, the government and business, employs entrepreneurial methods and leverages technology to deploy smart waste management solutions, that help keep the environment clean and safe while transforming communities through the creation of business and employment opportunities. “We are a digital and technology enabler, leveraging these capabilities to solve waste management problems. We want to keep communities and environments clean and safe,” Nyatsine added. To get waste removal services, one simply downloads the VAYA Africa app, selects Clean City garbage collection, and makes a request for collection. Clean City believes in sustainability and fully supports global initiatives towards the attainment of Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).