The Chronicle Showbiz Reporter
MultiChoice will next week launch 3Ktv, a Zimbabwean channel on DStv as part of its ongoing efforts to enhance its customers’ television viewing experience and offer locals content that resonates with them. From next week Monday, local DStv subscribers will be able to watch 3Ktv on Channel 293. The channel which is among those that were awarded operating licences by the Broadcasting Authority of Zimbabwe two years ago will broadcast content that will include local drama, reality shows, news, sport, educational programmes, and documentaries. It will also spotlight a wide range of Zimbabwean topics and people.  “3Ktv will launch on the DStv platform at 6am on Monday, February 28 on channel 293. It will be broadcasting 24 hours a day, seven days a week from its new studios based in Harare. It will be available to viewers on all DStv bouquets, from Premium through to Lite,” said Emmanuel Nyamayedenga, 3Ktv general manager. He highlighted that the channel that is under Jester Media Services aims to be the most followed, trusted and innovative station in Zimbabwe. “We will share compelling stories about our beautiful country as we leverage on the exciting partnership between 3Ktv and MultiChoice. The synergy is envisaged to promote the shared rich cultural diversity among our people over and above the technical and production support for the creative industry in television and film in Zimbabwe.” Said Norman Raisbeck, MultiChoice Zimbabwe general manager: “This is an exciting development that will further enhance the range of Zimbabwean-produced content available to DStv viewers. As Africa’s leading entertainment platform and most loved storyteller, we continuously seek opportunities to provide local and inspired content to Zimbabwean audiences. “Our goal with this channel is to enhance the customer’s viewing experience even more, and at a great value.” Some of the exciting highlights to look out for include Tangled, a local telenovela about the apparently not so perfect lives of two best friends; I Can Act, a reality talent show for aspiring actors. Another programme to look out for is Zim’ Best Barber, a reality game show in which 16 barbers compete for a prize worth of start-up barbershop equipment, through completing fun tasks and a process of elimination. Zim Uncovered, a travelogue (tour) of Zimbabwe’s cities, towns, growth points and suburbs will bring out the historical backgrounds, cultures of the people who live there as well as how certain places became popular. Another highlight will be Bachi Committee, a talk show programme focusing on issues that affect men in today’s society and the changing roles due to globalisation.