The Chronicle Sikhulekelani Moyo, Business Reporter
HARARE-headquartered Almin Metal Industries Limited is set to open three new branches next month as part of its business expansion drive. The new branches will be in Gweru, Kwekwe and Mutare. Founded in 1969, the company is involved in the manufacturing and supply of aluminium profiles for architecture, irrigation and general engineering purposes. It owns and operates an aluminium extrusion facility in Harare, the only one in Zimbabwe and has vertically integrated aluminium processing capabilities comprising of an extrusion plant and metal finishing operations such as anodising and powder coating. The company also has a branch in Bulawayo. Speaking to the Business Chronicle, Almin Industries national sales manager, Miss Ntombizodwa Mhlophe, said the company was on an expansion drive as it targets to open three new branches this year. “We are on expansion programme as we are opening a new branch in Gweru in February,” said Miss Mhlophe. “In April, we also intend to open another branch in Mutare and in August we will open another one in Kwekwe.” Miss Mhlophe said their expansion was inspired by the desire to boost domestic production and drive exports of aluminium products to countries like Zambia. “We will be venturing into exports to Zambia and Botswana so there is a lot we have planned ahead to grow the company and its name,” she said. The metals processing sector is one of the key economic pillars alongside agriculture, mining and tourism, which are among the top exporters. Miss Mhlophe said Almin Industries was producing its own aluminium products while most of its competitors were import finished products for resale. The company has said its operations were self-sufficient as it was operating a facility for melting, alloying and casting extrusion billet and also operates a light metal foundry. Its products are mainly sold to property developers, architects, shopfitters or fabricators, contractors, farmers and individuals. – @SikhulekelaniM1