The Chronicle Mbulelo Mpofu, Showbiz Reporter
Media personality, Arthur Evans is relishing the prospect of being one of the speakers at the upcoming Hustlers Summit slated for next month. Arthur Evans will complement a six-man facilitating team that includes South African radio personality, DJ Sbu, local female rapper Awa Khiwe, Chill Mpemba, Farai Gundani as well as Nkosana George Mazibisa for the business extravaganza to be held at one of the Zimbabwe International Trade Fair (ZITF) halls on March 24. “It feels great to be recognised. I’m excited and grateful that people are now recognising my other abilities outside of the media — 17 years of entrepreneurship and 19 years of business experience. “I’m expecting dialogue that empowers and elevates our people’s minds and subsequently, their businesses whether operating or still at conceptualisation.  “It’s a once-off event for this year that anyone who attends will have a head start,” said the news anchor. Evans, who has been involved with a lot of corporates brings a lot of entrepreneurial acumen after having partnered with DStv, ZITF, Steward Bank, OK Zimbabwe, Rainbow Tourism Group and Coca-Cola. He also heads his own PR consultancy firm specialising in video content creation that has consulted for leading brands such as PPC Zimbabwe and Spar. The D.I.Y founder is also passionate about education and annually, he funds tuition at secondary or tertiary level for at least one person and has this year, set his sights on furthering his education. “This year will be about a few things which include cementing my core brands in the country and regions in which they operate through visibility and transactions. Creatively, I always look to make history and money from my projects. That’s why I don’t do many each year because I prefer to go for bigger moves than small ones, thanks to the brand that I’ve developed. “A key pillar during all this will be to groom a few people and expose them to my opportunities, way of thinking and practices for their growth. It’s always been what I do. Around this, I’ll be pursuing my MBA hopefully with Nust because I like to support local entities where I can,” he added. – @eMKlass_49.