The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
ZIFA has requested all its affiliates to observe a moment of silence in honour of slain former Warriors’ defender Charles Yohane before kick-off of this weekend’s games. Yohane (48) was gunned down in South Africa in a reported carjacking. His body was found on Saturday night on the side of the road on the Soweto Highway in Meadowlands with gunshot wounds on his upper body. His family said the assailants shot him in the head. In its condolence message, Zifa said all teams that will be in action this weekend must wear black armbands as the nation mourns Yohane. “In memory and honour of this distinguished son of the game, Zifa requests all its members to observe a moment of silence at their association football events this coming weekend and for teams to wear black armbands,” said Zifa. The national association said it had leant with shock, sadness and dismay at the callous manner in which Yohane’s life was taken away by the armed thugs. “The Zimbabwe Football Association would like to convey our heartfelt condolences to the Yohane family and the entire national football family following the passing on of our Warrior Charles Yohane in Johannesburg, South Africa.  “As Zifa we have learnt with shock, sadness and dismay at the callous manner in which Charles Yohane’s life was taken away by armed robbers. “Our thoughts and prayers are with his family and loved ones in this time of untold sorrow,” said Zifa in a statement last night. Zifa said Yohane’s name shall forever be etched in the Zimbabwean football story. “Charles may have been taken away from us, but he leaves us with fond memories of his contribution to football, especially as player for our junior and senior national teams. He was a member of the Warriors’ team that qualified for Zimbabwe’s maiden Africa Cup of Nations finals in Tunisia in 2004. “He was also a member of the Warriors’ squad at the 2006 Afcon tournament in Egypt, underlining his talents as a defender who was equally at home playing as a midfielder.” Yohane started playing football in Mbare as a junior before joining Fire Batteries in the then Super League as a teenager. He went on to play for Caps United before moving to South Africa where he turned out for African Wanderers, AmaZulu and Bidvest Wits. It was at Bidvest Wits that he really shone and even captained the team for six years before moving to FC AK in the twilight of his playing career. He, however, returned to Wits as a club development coach, exploring his long-held passion for junior development. Yohane played for Zimbabwe national teams at all age groups from Under-17, Under-20, Under-23, and the senior team. He was capped 28 times for the Warriors.