The Chronicle Genesis 8:20-21
Then Noah built an altar to the LORD, and took of every clean animal and of every clean bird, and offered burnt offerings on the altar. And the LORD smelled a soothing aroma. Then the LORD said in His heart, “I will never again curse the ground for man’s sake, although the imagination of man’s heart is evil from his youth; nor will I again destroy every living thing as I have done. (NKJV) What is an altar?
An altar is a contact point in the physical realm which connects your life to the spiritual world of power and success. Altars were initiated by God and the aroma that goes up from them pleases Him. The Bible tells us that Noah built an altar to the Lord, for the Lord and for Heaven. This tells us that there are altars that are built for the devil as well. In the same way that God is pleased and begins to speak and act on our behalf as we build and service altars, is the same way that demons smell sacrifices offered to them on demonic altars and they also act according to how that altar is named. When demons are pleased by altars they give you demonic power and power to get money just as the Holy Spirit can empower you to get money through the same principle.  The same biblical principles are used and emulated by the devil. The money that comes from demonic altars that please hell is temporary but altars made unto God are holy and permanent. The Bible also tells us that there is a building process involved in altars. These contact points were built by placing rocks in order and they would resemble a big box; animals were placed on these altars and sacrificed. They were named and they affected things in the spiritual realm when sacrifices were offered to God upon them. When you build an altar you do it spiritually by faith. Noah sacrificed his best offering to the Lord, a clean offering on an altar. The altar that Noah built and sacrifices he offered there prompted the Lord to make promises to humanity because of the faithfulness of Noah. The Lord was pleased with the aroma from Noah’s sacrifices. If you follow these teachings, for your life in general, you will be very successful, you will have breakthroughs and prosperity. Have an altar in your home, office or place of business. God Bless. eaglelifeassembly@yahoo.com