The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Online Reporter Preparations for the National Arts Merit Awards (Namas) taking place in Harare this weekend are at an advanced stage with voting lines for the People’s Choice Award being opened. The awards which are in their 20th edition will be held at the HICC on Saturday. Last week the public was given a chance to nominate their favourite artistes for the People’s Choice Award category and artistes who managed to make the cut are Tamy Moyo, Nutty O, Madam Boss, Winky D and Dorcas Moyo. Nama executive director Napoleon “Napster” Nyanhi said the voting process has started with preparations for the main event on course. “From the names that were submitted across genres, we shortlisted the top five. This list was not from adjudicators but was completely from the people. “The winner will also be chosen by the people. People can cast their votes on www.gatewaystream.com with the voting set to end during the show. Our system will pick up the one with the most votes,” said Napster. He said nominees from outside Harare are expected to make their way to the capital on Friday. Tickets to the awards ceremony, Napster said tickets can also be found on the Gateway Stream website. Below is the full list of the nominees: 1.   DANCE AWARDS Outstanding Female Dancer Lisa Magwenzi (Love shouldn’t hurt) Lorin Sibanda (Footprints) Ndomupeishe Chipendo (Shuwa) Outstanding Male Dancer Devante Sanganza (My Passion for dance) John Cole (Gotta Feeling) Tichaona Chikara (Purpose Driven) Outstanding Dance Choreographer Mishael Ndlovu (Most High) John Cole (Loyal) Hillary Indie (Tipei Ndiro) Outstanding Dance Group Ezimnyama Ensemble (Hope) Umkhathi Theatre (Footprints) Elysium Magna Dance Theatre (Tipei Ndiro) 2.   VISUAL ARTS AWARDS Outstanding 2 Dimensional Work Yadeuka Haichahorereke by Keith Zenda Free at Last by Keith Zenda Domination by Joseph Nyakwenga Outstanding 3 Dimensional Nhumbu by Tatenda Gwarada Tears of Happy by Blesssing Mutukwa Bundle of Joy by Farai Tandi My Music Drum by Simelokuhle Zibengwa Outstanding Mixed Media Do not destroy us by Rickson Zavare Garandichauya Series 3 by Prudence Chimutuwah Restoration by    Forbes Mushipe Outstanding Exhibition No Nominees 3. SPOKEN WORD AWARDS Outstanding Poet Obert Dube Kuda Rice Tanyaradzwa Emily Ngundu Outstanding Comedian Theophilus Gabriel Chigumira Hidden Sibanda Kudzai Chengedza Special Mention: Mthokozisi Ncube Social Media Skits Tarisai Cleopatra Chikocho aka Madam Boss Prosper Ngomashi aka Comic Pastor Kingsley Kaisi aka       KingsleeZW 4.   MEDIA AWARDS Outstanding Journalist – Print Sithokozile Sibanda – Ilanga Kennedy Nyavaya – Standard Yvonne Ncube – Chronicle Outstanding Journalist – Radio Monica Chanda aka Moechanda                          – Classic263 Rumbidzai Mugwira aka Chamvari                     – Power FM Power FM Phathisani Sibanda & Tinashe Chikuse – Power FM Outstanding Journalist – Television Collette Musanyera – ZBC Patience Nyagato   –  ZBC Barney Mupariwa  –  ZBC Outstanding Journalist – Online Media Amazing Voices  – Nonkululeko Dube aka AmardZW SoProfound – Arnold Chirimuka Earground  –  Plot Mhako Special Mention: Nash TV 5. THEATRE AWARDS Outstanding Actor Shawn Mundawarara (Choosing Sam) Cedric Musongwelwa (Deathbed) Tafadzwa Bob Mutumbi      (The Good Minister from Kunyarara) Outstanding Actress Munyaradzi Guramatunhu (How are you really?) Eyahra Mathaiza (How are you really?) Rumbidzai Karize (Deathbed) Special Mention: Patricia Putsai (Bleeding wounds) Outstanding Theatrical Production Deathbed   by Savanna Trust Improvisational show at Oak Tree          by Under The Influence Theatre How are you really? by Talisma Theatre Company Outstanding Director Norbert Makoche (Bleeding wounds) Elizabeth Zaza Muchemwa (How are you really?) Teddy Mangava (Deathbed) 6.   LITERARY AWARDS Outstanding First Creative Published Work Bringing us back by Mercy Dhliwayo [Vhokololo Press] Diaspora Dreams by Andrew Chatora [Kharis Publishing] Umkhosi Wabangela Mazwi by Pretty Ndlovu [Ukhozi Publishers] Outstanding Children’s Book The Cursing Tortoise by Onwald Gwiriri [Essential Books Publishing Company] Auntie Mazvita by Tinashe Muchuri [Essential Books Publishing Company] Tim’s Adventure in the Chocolate World by Chris Martin Lebolang [Hoart Benom Pty Publishing] Special Mention ConvergenceZW by Mgcini Nyoni [Mgcini Nyoni] Dear Eternal Mom by Kuda Mucharambeyi [Soar Publishers] Outstanding Fiction Book Mboni by Abraham Makamera [Progressive Publishers] All Comes to Dust by Bryony Rheam [amaBooks] Sirens:Tales of Youth and Love by Leroy Mthulisi Ndlovu [Leroy Mthulisi Ndlovu] Outstanding Poetry Book Oasis in crisis by Ruth Tsopotsa [Ancient Pageant] For women Trying to breath and failing (It’s not your fault) by Batsirai Chigama [Ntombekhaya Poetry] Who killed Grandfather? by Kwanele Khumalo [Underclass Books and Films] 7.   FILM AND TELEVISION AWARDS Outstanding Actor Kumbilani Ncube as Khalu in Ikasi: The Hood Eddie Sandifolo as Maso in Poor Cousins Michael Kudakwashe Dzevamwe as Matsa in Kugara Nhaka Kuona Outstanding Actress Bathabile Dlamini as Blessing in Poor Cousins Thelmar Mukonza as Feli in Sister Dhokezi Felistas Tizola Officials as Immaculate  in Two Dead Government Outstanding Music Video Nhoroondo Directed by Vusa”Blaqs” Hlatshwayo ft. Jah Prayzah Rainmaker Directed by Kalai Faye Barlow ft. Djembe Monks Move Together Directed by     Jonathan Samukange ft. Desert Sessions Outstanding Screen Production (Television) Kuchina The Genesis Directed by Bless Gatsi Gazaland Police Directed by Lucky Aaron Chipo the Gift    Directed by Daves Guzha Outstanding Screen Production (Short Film) Ikasi: The Hood Directed by Mzingaye Ngwabi Mlamu Wami     Directed by Raisedon Baya Nehanda    Directed by Sydney Taivavashe Outstanding Screen Production (Full Length Film) Gonarezhou Directed by Sydney Taivavashe Poor Cousins Directed by Sydney Taivavashe Veza: The Unfolding Directed by Dumie Manyathela 8. MUSIC AWARDS Outstanding New Comer Felistas Chipendo aka Feli Nandi Sandra Sibanda Herman Mpelo Mukombe Day Tawanda Ncube aka DT Bio Mudimba Outstanding Female Musician Janet Manyowa Felistas Chipendo aka Feli Nandi Dorcas Moyo Gemma Griffiths Outstanding Male Musician Mukudzei  Mukombe aka Jah Prayzah Simbarashe Carrington Chiwadzwa aka Nutty O Rockford Josephat aka Roki Emergy Chizanga aka Freeman Outstanding Song Kujata-Jata by Day Tawanda Ncube aka DT Bio Mudimba Munyaradzi by Mukudzei Mukombe aka Jah Prayzah Hello Mwari by Rodney Mashandure aka  Jah Master Handipere Power by Simbarashe Carrington Chiwadzwa aka Nutty O Outstanding Album Hokoyo by Mukudzei Mukombe aka Jah Prayzah Sounds of Victory by Janet Manyowa Mustard Seed by Simbarashe Carrington Chiwadzwa aka Nutty O 5136 Born in Highfield by Trevor Dongo. 9. SPECIAL AWARDS Promoter Of The Year X-Mo Squad Bira Remadzisahwirwa Gateway Stream Outstanding Artist In The Diaspora Arnold Tongai Chirisa Awakhiwe Sibanda aka Awa Khiwe Zandile Mazithulela aka DJ Zandimaz – @mthabisi_mthire   