The Chronicle Mbulelo Mpofu, Showbiz Reporter
JM International is inviting young talented jazz musicians between the ages of 18 to 26 to apply for the 2022 edition of the JM Jazz World Orchestra. The JM Jazz World Orchestra (JMJWO) is the world’s premier international youth jazz orchestra, comprised of 21 talented jazz musicians selected through a global open audition by an international jury. The band works with some of the planet’s finest conductors, players and composers and tours annually, appearing at prestigious European venues and jazz festivals. Zimbabweans are also eligible to apply for this opportunity. A statement released by the JM Jazz World Orchestra read: “We are looking for highly talented musicians between the ages of 18 and 26, playing saxophone, trombone, trumpet, horn, tuba, guitar, bass, drums, percussion, piano, and vocals, and if you improvise, all other instruments are welcome. It is essential that you read sheet music, but the most important thing is your love for jazz!” Jazz music is one of Bulawayo’s most-listened-to genres with the likes of Ramsey K, The Bulawayo Sweet Rhythm Band, The Cool Crooners, Gugulethu “Berita” Khumalo, Dorothy Masuka and the Jobs Combination playing an integral part in reviving the Jazz spirit and such an opportunity may see a new Cool Crooner being born.  The JMJWO presents a unique opportunity for locals to play with other first-class, young jazz musicians from around the world as well as learn from some of the planet’s most accomplished jazz virtuosos who direct, mentor, and perform alongside the orchestra. On top of maintaining the highest standards of musicianship, the orchestra offers an invaluable intercultural learning experience and a taste of life as an internationally touring musician. US trombonist and composer/arranger Luis Bonilla will return for the 2022 edition, continuing his outstanding work as artistic director. Bonilla is a US-Costa Rican trombonist, composer, arranger and educator. Applicants should apply online via the following link www.mubazar.com/en/opportunity/jm-jazz-world-2022/apply by no later than March 31 and a professional international jury will select the best candidates. The jury will select up to 25 musicians to form the JM Jazz World Orchestra 2022 and announcement of results will be made by the end of April. – @eMKlass_49