The Chronicle Fungai Muderere, Senior Sports Reporter
CHICKEN Inn’s new signing Denzel Khumalo, who could not make his debut appearance for his new paymasters last weekend when they thumped visiting Tenax CS at Luveve Stadium, has now been successfully registered by the former league champions. The Gamecocks’ secretary-general Tavengwa Hara told Chronicle Sport that after following the Castle Lager Premier Soccer (PSL) proper player registration procedures, Khumalo now has his PSL player licence. “While we would have loved to see Denzel Khumalo play his first game for us last weekend, his papers were not in order. However, I can confirm that we have successfully registered him. After following the rightful player registration procedures, we are happy to say the player now has his PSL licence,” said Hara. Khumalo is on record saying he has put his “unpleasant” stay at FC Platinum behind him and is now fully focused on delivering for his new side Chicken Inn.  Last week, the 24-year-old midfield dynamo was among new players unveiled by the Gamecocks at Luveve Stadium.
Other players unveiled were Tawanda Zinaka from Bulawayo City, striker Brighton Ncube from the Mkhokheli Dube-owned Tshabalala-based Zebra Revolution, midfielder Richard Hachiro from Caps United and Malvin Hwata from Cranborne Bullets. Hwata scored a brace in his first appearance for the Gamecocks. Khumalo, whose potential has never been fully realised, joined FC Platinum from Highlanders in 2019 after being lured to Zvishavane by his former coach at Bosso Pieter de Jongh. However, De Jongh’s stay at the champions was short lived and he found himself being frozen out of the side by coach Norman Mapeza. He was among a host of players whose contracts were not renewed by FC Platinum when the transfer window opened last month. Meanwhile, Chicken Inn are yet to register striker Leroy “Lister” Ndlovu. “Leroy has been with us, but he has not yet been successfully registered. His parent club is Black Mambas, and as such there are submissions that we are yet to make with the Premier Soccer League,” said Hara. – @FungaiMuderere