The Chronicle Mbulelo Mpofu, Showbiz Reporter
Bulawayo-born self-taught beautician and make-up artiste, Elinah Success Mangena has been recognised for her efforts following her recent two nominations at the Zororo/Phumulani Zimbabwe Achievers Awards (ZAA) South African edition. Nominees for the seventh edition of ZAA were recently unveiled via Facebook Live. The theme for this year’s edition is “The perfect celebration of open horizons” with the awards dinner gala slated for 26 March 26 in Johannesburg. After falling short in last year’s African Social Entertainment Awards (ASEA) held in South Africa, Elinah is licking her lips at the prospect of winning two ZAA awards. The Boss Lady, as Elinah is affectionately known, is nominated for the Female Personality Award and Outstanding Author Award. She attributes her recognition to her recently published book, The Diary of a Self-Taught Make-Up Artist.  She expressed excitement for the nominations. “This is a huge honour for me as it shows how far I’ve come with my business. Being nominated twice makes it sweeter as well. My book has been a huge success as I’ve gotten positive reviews from people encouraging me to write more. The goal is winning both gongs, but even if I don’t, just the nominations and recognition suffice. “I’m excited for the huge honour vested in me for my work in the industry as I’m self-taught and this goes on to show that with the right mindset and work ethic, greatness is achievable,” she said. The world of beauty enhancement is one that Elinah has thrived in for quite some time and her CV has lots of celebrities on it. Some of the best television darlings have witnessed first-hand, Elinah waving her magic wand on their image, transforming it. She has worked with elite media personnel including Mbo Mahocs, award-winning Nonhle Thema, Scandal’s Mapaseka Koetle widely known as Dintle, Chi Mhende (Wandile from Generations The Legacy), Thuso Mbedu and Tamy Moyo. Voting for the awards commenced this week on the organisation’s website. – @eMKlass_49