The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
HAVING been the busiest local team during the January transfer window, Bulawayo Chiefs coach Nilton Terroso insists his side is not targeting immediate success but rather building a team that will sustain success. Amakhosi Amahle have brought in Kelvin Madzongwe, Obriel Chirinda, Obadiah Tarumbwa, Perfect Chikwende, Kelvin Moyo and Dela Akorli from Ghana.  On paper, Chiefs appear to have assembled a strong squad capable of staging a shock title challenge. Terroso himself has had a good start to the league getting four points from two games. With the new additions, Terroso however, ruled out trying to win the championship this season. “As a club we are not obsessed or solely focused on immediate success, what we are building here is trying to sustain success and find our consistency within the league and be able to create a foundation of what will be success consecutively in the future. “We don’t want to take too big of a step forward and have to take steps backwards after that. They have to show the players what is needed to win. I am proud to have them. I have no doubt that they will be crucial additions. “These are great acquisitions to the team who bring quality to the side, no doubt about that. Their character and personality, professionalism and experience they add to the club is invaluable,” he said.
Chiefs are in action this Sunday when they face champions FC Platinum at Luveve Stadium in what promises to be a thriller. “We will approach this game the same way we did with the previous two and the next remaining games in the league. We know it’s going to be difficult but we respect our opponents as we do with all other teams. For us we are still in the preparatory phase but we are confident in the sense of what we are capable of doing. We are motivated because competition is what we train for. “We are confident but we don’t confuse confidence with arrogance. Like I said, we respect our opponents, they are led by a well-respected coach and have the last three titles. In eleven games played in a year they lost only one. We can’t run away from that. This is a game that will show what level we are at and see where we need to improve,” said Terroso. Earlier this week, Chiefs announced that Moors World of Sports (MWOS) will see the bookmakers’ being their principal sponsor. The sponsorship announced on Monday states that MWOS’ logo will feature on the front of all Chiefs’ playing shirts. — @innocentskizoe