The Chronicle CHINESE tennis player Peng Shuai, whose sexual assault allegations against a leading Chinese politician made global headlines, has met with International Olympic Committee (IOC) President Thomas Bach during the Beijing 2022 Winter Olympic Games. The IOC revealed that the meeting was held on Sunday at the Olympic Club in Beijing, with former IOC Athletes’ Commission chair (Youth, Sport, Arts and Recreation minister of Zimbabwe) Kirsty Coventry in attendance. (Minister) Coventry replaced current IOC Athletes’ Commission chair Emma Terho, who was unable to make the meeting following her positive Covid-19 test. The IOC claimed the three participants agreed that “further communication about the content of the meeting” would be left to Peng’s discretion. “Peng Shuai informed the president that she would attend several events at the Olympic Winter Games Beijing 2022 over the coming days,” an IOC statement read. “Later that evening, she and (Minister) Coventry attended the mixed curling match between China and Norway. During the dinner, the three spoke about their common experience as athletes at the Olympic Games, and Peng Shuai spoke of her disappointment at not being able to qualify for the Olympic Games Tokyo 2020. “In this context, she also shared her intention to travel to Europe when the Covid-19 pandemic is over, and the IOC president invited her to Lausanne to visit the IOC and the Olympic Museum, to continue the conversation on their Olympic experiences. “Peng Shuai accepted this invitation. (Minister) Coventry and Peng Shuai also agreed that they would remain in contact.  And all three agreed that any further communication about the content of the meeting would be left to her discretion.” Bach said last week that the meeting with Peng would help to “convince us in person of her wellbeing and state of mind”. The IOC had held a series of phone conversations with Peng since November, when her whereabouts and safety became a cause for global concern after making sexual assault accusations against a high-ranking Chinese Communist Party (CCP) official. Peng published a post on Chinese social media platform Weibo in which she alleged Zhang Gaoli, a former senior vice-premier and senior CCP official, sexually assaulted her 10 years ago. This was deleted within 20 minutes, and Peng was not seen for more than two weeks afterwards. Peng reportedly retracted the allegations in an interview with Chinese media, but there have been concerns raised over the legitimacy of her comments and her ability to speak freely.
She has repeated the retraction in an interview with French newspaper l’Equipe, claiming she had decided to delete the post and claimed there had been a “misunderstanding” of her initial comments. Peng also denied that she had disappeared. “Firstly, I’d like to thank all of the many ATP and WTA players, sportspeople and leading figures who were worried about me,” she told L’Equipe. “I never thought there’d be such worry, though, and I’d like to know, why was that the case? There was a huge misunderstanding in the outside world following this post. I don’t want the meaning of this post to be twisted anymore. And I don’t want any further media hype around it. “Sexual assault? I never said anyone had sexually assaulted me in any way.” Bach said prior to the meeting that he would be willing to investigate any concerns raised by Peng, but insisted the ball remained in her court. The IOC was asked at the daily Beijing 2022 press conference whether the organisation would support an independent investigation. “I am not sure we are able to make that call as a sports organisation,” said Mark Adams, IOC presidential spokesperson. “I think the president was right in saying it shouldn’t be for us to judge whether there is an investigation or not. We have seen the words she given to L’Equipe. We need to listen to her and read what she is saying. We have been in contact with her and met with her in person, we are doing everything we can to make sure the situation is as it should be.” – Inside the Games