The Chronicle Mkhululi Ncube, Showbiz Reporter
Clement Magwaza and his Macrey Super Sounds will today hold a musical memorial service for the late dancer, Bambanani “Tsholobela” Maphosa who died on February 5. The 24-year-old dancer, who worked with Magwaza for 12 years, died in Plumtree after a short illness and was buried last Monday. Magwaza said due to the fact that most of the band members were not able to bid farewell to Tsholobela as they could not attend the burial, they have decided to hold a memorial. “As artistes, when one of us dies we have our own way of bidding them farewell by doing what we do, which is performing live. Just like when soldiers are buried, the army will be present and do their own traditions. We also have ours and we couldn’t do that on Monday as the members were off and were at various locations. “To send him off we’re going to perform just like we were doing when he was alive,” he said.
Magwaza said he needed all the band members present for the memorial so that they all pay their last respects to their colleague so as to find some form of closure. “It’ll be a free show and we hope our fans will come and support us as we pay our last respects. Those who may want to extend a helping hand to the Tsholobela family are free to do so because they need all the support during this difficult time,” he said. Magwaza said the show, which will be held at the late dancer’s homestead, is also open to other Rhumba bands who may want to join hands with his team for the musical memorial service. Meanwhile, another musical memorial service has been set for South Africa at the Hillbrow Theatre next week Saturday. So far, seven artistes have confirmed participation. Rhumba musician Mandlenkosi “Godolude” Mpofu who worked with Tsholobela during his stint with Magwaza said they will use the show to also fund-raise for the late dancer’s family. “Tsholobela left a young family and fans will contribute R100 which will be given to his wife. Tsholobela entertained fans a lot in South Africa so it’s fitting that we hold the show for him here as well,” Godolude said. He said other bands that will perform include Insimbi Zezhwane, Dubia Masters, Mxolisi “Mr Bones” Ndlovu, Tsheba Boys, Nlondo Shinning Stars and Abigail Mabuza. – @themkhust