The Chronicle Mbulelo Mpofu, Showbiz Reporter
LAST year, comedian and celebrity chef Carl Joshua Ncube launched a recipe book, Chikafu with one of the recipes set to feature on popular gastronomic YouTube channel, Best Ever Food Review Show (BEFRS). Carl confirmed the developments on his Twitter account where he asked his followers to guess which recipe had been selected. “Can you guess what recipe from my new book Chikafu is going to be featured on the Best Ever Food Review Show which is one of the biggest YouTube channels with 8 million subscribers?”  On the same post, he also shared a picture with the BEFRS’s host, American filmmaker Will “Sonny Side” Sonbuchnera and part of the production crew. In an interview, Carl told Chronicle Showbiz that it is going to take at least two months before his recipe gets reviewed. “The team is still travelling around the world and my recipe will be reviewed at least after two months so expect it to premiere at least in March,” he said. The BEFRS crew which is based in Vietnam jetted into the country last month and visited the comedian at his residence in a village between the Victoria Falls Airport and a town called Ntabayengwe. Together with Sonny and crew, Carl cooked at Mai Garis restaurant at a local growth point called Lupinyu, opposite the airport. The award-winning show which explores many different cuisines around the world was created by Sonny Side and its first episode was uploaded in 2015. Sonny Side is a globetrotter who has eaten in more than 10 countries with Zimbabwe making part of that list as well as he visited Carl last month. Carl himself is not new to travelling the world too and he has taken Zimbabwean comedy internationally. His recipe book consists of a century of Zimbabwean traditional recipes and also 25 cocktail recipes. Among some of the recipes entailed in his electronic book includes the mopane worms, star tea and baked fish with a chilli cajun sauce. The funny fellow is a man of many talents as he is also a graphic designer, content creator, actor, life coach, entrepreneur and is a self-acclaimed Celebrity Villager. It is only a matter of time before Zimbabweans get to witness which one of his recipes will be reviewed on the food and travel channel soon. – @eMKlass_49.