The Chronicle Oliver Kazunga, Senior Business Reporter
STAKEHOLDERS in the tourism sector have applauded the Government lifting the 10-day mandatory quarantine on in-bound tourists saying the move would facilitate recovery and growth of the industry. Acting Health and Child Care Minister, Professor Amon Murwira announced the new measures in a statement on Friday where he also outlined broader Covid-19 Level 2 national lockdown review measures. However, visitors and returning residents should still produce Covid-19 test result certificates taken 48 hours before departure. Zimbabwe Tourism Authority (ZTA) head of corporate communications, Mr Godfrey Koti, said they were excited that the curfew, which previously started at 9PM had been shifted to midnight while restaurants and bars can open until 10PM on condition that they only serve fully vaccinated customers. “Following the Government’s announcement that the 10-day mandatory quarantine for all in-bound travellers has been lifted with immediate effect, as the Zimbabwe Tourism Authority, we would like to express our gratitude and how delighted we are to hear this kind of news,” he said. “It can only help us in focusing on growing the tourism product as much as we can. Remember we have set very huge targets through our ZimBho Campaign, MICE Campaign, the Meeting Meet in Zim, as well as the Visit Zimbabwe, which is an international campaign that we are running.” Mr Koti said the sector was still focused on the US$5 billion tourism economy target by 2025, which he said was achievable. Despite the new measures, he said ZTA was urging the public and players in the tourism sector to continue adhering to safety guidelines. “We must wear our masks and socially distance physically and of course keep all the other protocols in line for us to be able to save the tourism sector,” he said. The Government has relaxed the Covid-19 Level 2 national lockdown after observing that the country’s Covid-19 epidemic curve was indicating that the fourth wave was at its tail end and appeared to have been brought under control. Tourism Business Council of Zimbabwe president Mr Wengayi Nhau said: “We welcome the relaxation of the Covid-19 protocols in response to the reduction in the number of infections, transmissions, hospitalisation and the deaths and on the other hand, the rate of recovery going above 90 percent. “That’s what we applaud the Government for because they responded to our call. They responded to the easing of such rates of infection and transmission by also relaxing some of the conditions that were brought about by the Statutory Instrument 267 of 2021. “So, this has put the industry back on a good recovery position.” – @KazungaOliver