The Chronicle Paul Collingwood has been appointed as England’s interim men’s head coach for the three-match Test series against West Indies in March. Chris Silverwood left his role as head coach last week following England’s 4-0 Ashes defeat by Australia. Former all-rounder Collingwood took charge of England’s 3-2 Twenty20 series defeat in the Caribbean last month. “I am genuinely excited to be leading the Test team for the tour of the Caribbean,” he said. “I can’t wait to get started.” The Test squad is set to be announced today. England will arrive in Antigua on 25 February and will play a four-day warm-up match starting on 1 March followed by three Tests. The first Test at the Sir Vivian Richards Cricket Ground in Antigua starts on 8 March. Collingwood, 45, was part of England’s coaching staff at the T20 World Cup and the Ashes. Silverwood, director of cricket Ashley Giles and assistant coach Graham Thorpe have all stepped down following a run that has seen England win only one of their past 14 Tests.  Sir Andrew Strauss has temporarily taken over from Giles and the former captain has appointed Collingwood. Joe Root will remain as Test captain, with Ben Stokes as vice-captain. “Having a challenging Test series against the West Indies straight off the back of the Ashes disappointment gives us a chance from now to reset and rebuild,” said Collingwood. “My objective is to give players clarity, direction and encouragement for them to start building something special. “I have spoken to Joe Root and Ben Stokes, and both are excited and passionate to take the team forward in this new cycle. “Although they know it won’t be easy, they have the desire and bravery to do things differently to ensure the team can prosper. “We have an opportunity to get back on track. Meanwhile, India beat West Indies by six wickets after bowling the tourists out for 176 in the first one-day international. West Indies slumped to 79-7 before Jason Holder made 57 to drag his side up to a respectable total in Ahmedabad. Spinners Yuzvendra Chahal and Washington Sundar shared seven wickets in what was India’s 1,000th ODI. In reply, new skipper Rohit Sharma top-scored with 60 after sharing an 84-run opening stand with Ishan Kishan as India cruised home in the 28th over. Former captain Holder reached the landmark of 2,000 ODI runs during his half-century before being dismissed by Prasidh Krishna. The second game of the three-match series will take place tomorrow at the same venue. — BBC sport