The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
MALAWI’S Youth and Sports Minister Richard Chimwendo Banda is the new African Union Sports Council (AUSC) Region 5 Council of Ministers Troika chairperson, replacing Ulemu Msungama following a Cabinet reshuffle by President Lazarus Chakwera at the end of last month. Banda will chair the council up to 2024. Mozambique and Lesotho are the other two members of the Region 5 Council of Ministers Troika. AUSC Region 5 chief executive officer Stanley Mutoya was in Malawi to brief Banda on the operations of the region as well as his roles and responsibilities at regional and continental level. By virtue of his position, Banda will be responsible for delivery of the 10th edition of the Region 5 Games scheduled for Lilongwe, from December 2-11 this year. He will also be expected to steer the Region 5 ship in policy making and providing strategic direction on sport development. At continental level, Banda will be expected to contribute to the African Union Specialised Technical Committee for Ministers responsible for Youth, Culture and Sport (STC-YCS). Mutoya also apprised Banda on the rationale and significance of the Region 5 Youth Games and other programmes. “Emphasis was placed on the Region 5 Games as they serve as a strategy to stimulate economic transformation through sport. The Games are also a significant vector and catalyst for infrastructure development and rehabilitation and in the process serve as the nexus for national development through sport. “This is in consistency with Article 26 of the Sadc Protocol on Culture, Information and Sport signed by all Heads of State on 14 August 2001 in Blantyre, Malawi, in which state parties are charged to collaborate in the organisation of regional tournaments in different sports codes whose modalities and frequency shall be agreed upon,” said Mutoya.  The discussion with Banda addressed plans for the continual improvement and plans for ensuring improved performance by Region 5 athletes during major international competitions. “The Minister was unequivocal on the need to ensure that Region 5 translates its organisational efficiency and level of organisation to results on the field of play. “He challenged the Region 5 ecosystem to ensure that there is ownership of the organisation by all its members and collective responsibility towards the aspirations of sports excellence and use of sport as a vector for enhancing socio-economic development,” said Mutoya. Banda assured Mutoya that the government of Malawi remained committed and steadfast in delivering its mandate of successfully hosting the 10th edition of the Region 5 Youth Games. He said the government of Malawi was a proud member of the Region 5 family and would deliver on its mandate and obligation to the Region. He said Malawi will do everything within its reach to leave a legacy through hosting of the Region 5 Games. A total of 10 Region 5 member countries, Angola, Botswana, Eswatini, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, South Africa, Zambia and Zimbabwe, will participate in 11 sports codes on the Games’ programme. The football competition will serve as a qualifier for the 15th edition of the Caf Total Energies Under-17 men’s football Africa Cup of Nations to be staged in Algeria next year.