The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
THE Premier Soccer League has refused to be cowed into submission by suspended Zifa executive committee members and said attempts to divide the PSL would not be entertained. In a statement, the PSL said it condemned the shocking vindictive behaviour and intimidatory tactics being employed by three suspended Zifa executive committee members, president Felton Kamambo, Philemon Machana and Bryton Malandule to suspend leaders of Caps United, Dynamos, Highlanders, Manica Diamonds and PSL chief executive officer Kennedy Ndebele. In addition to the five PSL officials, the suspended Zifa board also announced that it had suspended Zifa acting chief executive officer Xolisani Gwesela, national teams’ general manager Wellington Mpandare and 27 Zifa councillors that signed a petition calling for an extraordinary general meeting to possibly revoke the mandate of the suspended board members.  “The Premier Soccer League has noted with concern that some members of the suspended Zifa executive committee have sent correspondence purportedly suspending the leaders of Caps United, Dynamos, Highlanders and Manica Diamonds Football Clubs together with the PSL chief executive officer Kennedy Ndebele. “The Premier Soccer League condemns this shocking behaviour that is tantamount to vindictive and intimidatory tactics by the three suspended executive committee members,” read Ndebele’s statement. Ndebele said it was surprising that despite PSL chairman Farai Jere being a member of the suspended executive committee, he was never invited to the so-called board meeting which effected the suspensions. “We would like to categorically state that an attempt to divide the Premier Soccer League family will not be tolerated. It is on record that the Zifa executive committee and the Zifa chief executive officer were suspended by the Sports and Recreation Commission (SRC) on 16 November 2021 and 27 November 2020 respectively. The suspensions of the said PSL officials are therefore illegal and of no force and effect. “The PSL governors unanimously agreed to petition the revocation of the mandate to executive committee members as provided in the Zifa statutes after observing a number of irregularities; these being poor governance, lack of transparency and failing to respect the judicial bodies’ decisions among a plethora of other issues. We stand by our suspended PSL board members and chief executive officer,” read the statement.