The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Reporter
DJ Zandimaz has reached a milestone in her music career that is still in its infancy as her debut single Emathandweni has reached double platinum. As if that was not enough, the South Africa-based artiste who hails from Esigodini is also being appreciated back home as she is nominated in four categories of the forthcoming Zimbabwe Music Awards (Zima). She is nominated in the Best International Zimbabwe Artiste, Best Dance, Best Female Artiste and Best Collaboration for her song Ngifuna Wena that features Mafikizolo songstress Nhlanhla Nciza and local Nutty O. The other nominations are from her Emathandweni hit track that has made her a powerhouse female DJ in Africa. Speaking from South Africa the DJ said she is on cloud nine due to the support she is receiving. “I’m super humbled with the four nominations. This is something a girl like me could never have seen coming. The love I’ve been getting from home is overwhelming and encouraging as it shows that people are enjoying and embracing my art. “I cannot wait to show up on the red carpet and rock it. I hope we’ll win and take something home to our Matabeleland region,” said DJ Zandimaz. On reaching double platinum, DJ Zandimaz said it was another dream come true. “Emathandweni has reached double-platinum which is more than great considering that this was my first ever song. I hope that as I grow, more hits will find their way,” said DJ Zandimaz. And looking at the popularity of her latest track Ngifuna Wena, the DJ is on the right track and definitely billed to reach another double platinum.  To celebrate her achievements thus far, DJ Zandimaz said her fans and followers should brace themselves for a homecoming gig as she wants to show her appreciation. “I’m planning on hosting a homecoming gig to celebrate with my people. We’re working on the logistics and will announce the venue and date once we’ve confirmed everything. I hope people will come in numbers and celebrate with me,” she said. – @mthabisi_mthire