The Chronicle Business Editor
ZIMBABWE has lined up a packed programme covering diverse destination and product marketing events ahead of the “National Day” scheduled for 14 March at the on-going Expo 2020 Dubai in the United Arab Emirates (UAE). On this day the whole expo attention will be dedicated to celebrating Zimbabwe hence it is called the “National or Honour Day for Zimbabwe”. Each country participant has such a dedicated day. According to Expo 2020 Dubai Zimbabwe Pavilion commissioner-general, Ambassador Mary Mubi the National Day will be graced by the UAE leadership and senior Government representation from Zimbabwe. Preparations for this special day are at advanced stages with highlights including high level visit to the pavilion, an investment business conference, diaspora engagement and live performances by Zimbabwean artists including popular musician, Jah Prayzah. “We still have our National Day on the 14th of March, so we’re busy preparing for that and we’ve a number of events that are taking place,” said Amb Mubi in a recent update shared with The Chronicle. “We’ve an artist exhibition, which is now taking place within the expo village. We also have a trade and investment conference that is coming up and there are a number of ministers that are attending conferences. “We had the Minister of Transport (Felix Mhona) who was invited to attend at a national conference here (last week) at the expo. We also have the Minister of Agriculture (Dr Anxious Masuka) who is coming to showcase the opportunities in the agricultural sector.” Amb Mubi also said in early March the country would host a tourism sector indaba that will showcase available opportunities.  “There are a number of events that we’re looking forward to be putting together. This is to be an extremely busy time for us,” she said. “And of course, one of the challenges is competing with everybody else because everybody else wants the attention on what they are doing.” The country has scored key investment and trade marketing milestones since the beginning of the expo last October. Tourism, mining and agriculture investment opportunities have received a lot of inquiries from nearly 200 000 potential investors and buyers who have visited the country’s pavilion. Potential investors have submitted their requests to the Zimbabwe Investment Development Authority (ZIDA) for facilitation mining, solar and hydro power generation, agriculture imports of macadamia nuts, horticultural products, livestock products, setting up of green field companies in many sectors, tourism amongst others, said the commission. There have also been requests by many visitors to the Zimbabwe pavilion for invites during local workshops and conferences especially for mining and agriculture. This has afforded the country to explain and clarify on enquiries regarding travel regulations, visas and permits issuance, peace and security in the country as well as the best time to visit Zimbabwe. According to the Zimbabwe Pavilion commissioner-general, visitors who have shown keen interest in doing business in Zimbabwe countries include; UAE, China, India, UK, USA, France, Russia, Germany Indonesia, Kenya, Malawi, Uganda, Philippines, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Oman, Jordan, Bangladesh and Zimbabweans in Diaspora amongst others. Vice-President Constantino Chiwenga, captains of industry, ministers, ambassadors, senior Government officials, renowned celebrities and musicians have also visited and toured the uniquely designed Zimbabwe pavilion.