The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
Match-manipulation whistle-blower referee Allan Basvi has resumed full time officiating after being sidelined in 2019 for refusing to throw matches as per instruction from a Zimbabwe Referee Committee member. Basvi, an attested member of the Zimbabwe National Army, was the fourth official in the Castle Lager Premier Soccer League match between Highlanders and Whawha played at Barbourfields Stadium on Sunday. He was one of the victims of the ZRC who went on a purge to suspend anyone suspected of refusing to toe the line or not consenting to sexual demands. Basvi exposed the underhand dealings in 2020 when he accused a member of the referees’ committee of ordering him to manipulate the result of a match in which the official had vested interest. Speaking to Chronicle Sport then, Basvi said his boss phoned him on the eve of two matches involving a team whose relegation survival he was interested in towards the end of the 2019 season and directed him to influence the results.  After Basvi didn’t play along and the boss’ team was relegated, he said he was punished by being struck off the list of referees that were to handle Premier Soccer League matches in 2020 despite refereeing 26 matches in 2019, including some crucial Division One games. Basvi’s bold move to expose the match manipulation scourge was in line with Fifa’s position on match manipulation which is, recognise, resist and report (Triple R). When sexual harassment allegations erupted, more officials had to be struck off the register, including match commissioners like Edson Nkau, Tabani Mnkantjo, Sabelo Sibindi among others. However, following the suspension of Zifa executive committee members by the Sports and Recreation Commission over a litany of charges, most suspended officials have since returned to the game. Zifa executive committee member Bryton Malandule chaired the referees’ committee with his deputy Bryton Mudzamiri taking over leadership of the committee soon after the SRC cracked the whip on Zifa leadership.