The Chronicle Thandeka Moyo-Ndlovu, Senior Health Reporter
BRIAN Teputepu has been living with HIV for a quarter of a century and is one of those who contracted and beat the deadly Covid-19 pandemic despite suffering from an underlying illness. The pastor from Beitbridge said he had a near death experience with Covid-19 which saw him isolated for more than 21 days at a local hotel used as an isolation centre in the border town. His compromised immune system due to HIV could have easily given in to Covid-19 which has so far killed 5 386 Zimbabweans. He recalls how at one time he was almost put on oxygen when his condition had deteriorated but fought the battle just to share his inspiring recovery story. Pastor Teputepu is one of the 3 368 019 Zimbabweans who have been fully vaccinated since the rollout of the mass vaccination campaign. The founder of the Association of Christian Truckers of Southern Africa, a ministry he started for fellow truck drivers, Pastor Teputepu tested positive to Covid-19 early last year. By mid-February last year Zimbabwe had started rolling out the lifesaving vaccines which according to health officials, are effective in reducing the number of Covid-19 deaths. Zimbabwe’s commitment to containing the deadly pandemic which has not only claimed many lives globally but has also disrupted economic activities across the globe, has seen it mobilising more than US$100 million to purchase vaccines. The country launched its Covid-19 vaccination campaign on 22 February 2021, targeting health workers and essential service providers. With the availability of more doses, the vaccination exercise was opened to everyone and is being provided on a voluntary basis for free. This development allowed the country to open most economic activities at the end of September last year. Besides the financial commitment to procuring the vaccines, Covid-19 also pushed the Government to invest more in healthcare which saw the reopening of Ekusileni Healthcare Centre in Bulawayo and the refurbishment of other public health institutions to cater for Covid-19 patients. In November, the Ministry of Health and Child Care also extended the vaccination programme to learners and plans are underway to also include those aged 14-15. While Covid-19 vaccination has allowed countries to open their economic activities, continued adherence to preventive measures to avoid the spread of the virus by wearing face masks, washing hands and respecting social distance remain critical in Zimbabwe. To date more than 20 million doses have been procured and Pastor Teputepu is happy to be among those fully vaccinated. As of Saturday, a cumulative total of 233 224 Covid-19 cases including 224 795 recoveries had been recorded in Zimbabwe. “When I tested positive to Covid-19 last year in January, I knew I could easily develop complications as I am also HIV-positive. I then opted to be isolated at the Rainbow Hotel where they were nursing other infected patients who did not have recommended facilities at home. I was in a lot of pain, I thought I was going to die but I told myself that despite the struggle I was not going to be put on oxygen. While others who were in isolation spent a maximum of 14 days, I spent about 21 days,” said pastor Teputepu. He said the pain he endured was enough to convince him to get vaccinated and he was among the first people to be vaccinated in Beitbridge when the Government extended the programme to the general public. “I have been often accused of being too forward and talkative about these issues as people know that I am openly living with HIV. So when I tested positive to Covid-19, I reflected on my life as I was in so much pain and thought God had decided to allow me to rest,” said Pastor Teputepu. He said he remembers failing to walk at one time to collect food and had to be assisted as he was struggling to breathe. “It was such a disaster but here I am to prove to others that even with underlying conditions we can still recover to tell the story,” said Pastor Teputepu. As one inclined to Biblical teachings, he was convinced that the Covid-19 vaccine was not in any way the mark of the beast as some people claim. “You know when I first tested positive to HIV in 1997 I was suicidal, it took me two years to open up about the issue. I went through a lot of struggles and shame within until I realised there was hope in knowing there is a God who loves and cares for me despite my status,” added Pastor Teputepu. He said it saddens him to hear people come up with all theories and excuses against vaccines because they are based on mere myths. “I think people should just be real and be able to go and test even for HIV and then be willing to take available medication or vaccines, it’s as simple as that,” said the man of God. He also said vaccines are there to help people fight off life-threatening infections and diseases hence people should be willing to get vaccinated as they are free and safe even for people with underlying conditions like himself. “I tested positive for HIV at a time when people were dying like flies and my greatest worry was I would not have children of my own.  There were no free ARVs then and it was evident that I would die but I am happy those results were a turning point, I found my way into Jesus’ arms after that,” he said. Pastor Teputepu said before he got married he disclosed his status to his girlfriend who accepted him and they got married in 1999. They used pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP), a recommended method to protect the negative partner from contracting HIV. His wife has maintained her negative status from then and the couple has been blessed with four children.
Consistent condom use limits transmission and is recommended for safe conception for serodiscodent couples like Pastor Teputepu and his wife. “I could have easily died of Aids but I am still alive despite my compromised immune system. When I tested positive to Covid-19 many people were dying as well and I believe I recovered so that I can see my four children grow and enjoy more happy days with my wife who is still HIV-negative,” said Pastor Teputepu. — @thamamoe