The Chronicle Michael Magoronga, Midlands Correspondent
Zanu-PF Central Committee member Cde Wellington Magura has urged party members in Kwekwe District to unite and rally behind those elected to represent the party in the March 26 by- elections. He made the remarks while addressing party supporters during an inter-district meeting held at the Kwekwe District headquarters on Tuesday. Cde Magura’s remarks follow the disqualification of Cdes Energy ‘Dhala’ Ncube and Kandros Mugabe who intended to stand in the Kwekwe Central Constituency by-election. The two were disqualified days before the primary elections on allegations of dragging the name of the party into disrepute through violence and vote buying. The disqualification followed violence which broke out at the party headquarters last year. A third candidate, Cde John Mapurazi, who is a former deputy mayor for the town was unopposed in the primary election following the disqualification of his two. Cde Magura urged party members to put differences aside and rally behind Cde Mapurazi saying the party was bigger than any individual. “We are here today and I know some of you are disgruntled, but let me tell you that there is no individual who is bigger than the party. At the end of the day, Cdes Ncube and Mugabe had no option, but to obey the party policy and they had to stand down as ordered. This shows how much they regard the party instead of their individual capacities,” said Cde Magura. He hailed the two for their humbleness and urged them to rally behind Cde Mapurazi. “Let me thank the two for being humble and realising that they are not bigger than the party. They did not complain, but went on to continue working tirelessly for the party. The party remains bigger than us all, if we realise that we will win the 2023 elections resoundingly,” he said. Cde Magura reminded the supporters that the main purpose was garnering votes for President Mnangagwa and Zanu-PF come 2023. He urged all those who had joined camps either belonging to Cde Ncube or Bishop Mugabe to rally behind Cde Mapurazi. “There is no one belonging to Ncube, or anyone belonging to Mugabe, we are now one belonging to Zanu-PF. Let us all put our weight behind Cde Mapurazi and we will win the constituency. It is high time we take our constituency back,” said Cde Magura. Cdes Ncube and Mugabe pledged their support for Cde Mapurazi. “We are all behind Cde Mapurazi despite the disqualification. At the end of the day, no individual is bigger than the party so we are pursuing the main goal that is to work towards achieving five million votes for our president come 2023,” said Cde Ncube. Cde Mugabe said they were united and behind Cde Mapurazi. “Let us all work towards supporting Cde Mapurazi. We should bury our hatchets and continue serving the party. We should forget all about who belongs to which clan or that individual. We are working for the party and to achieve five million votes for President Mnangagwa in 2023,” said Cde Mugabe.