The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
TOP betting company, Moors World of Sports (MWOS), has struck a partnership deal with ambitious Castle Lager Premier Soccer League club Bulawayo Chiefs, which will see the Ninjas being kitted by the bookmakers. MWOS are the principal kit sponsors of Chiefs, and their name will be inscribed on the replicas. Besides providing kits, MWOS will from time to time assist Chiefs with some of their day-to-day operations. The MWOS deal comes less than a month after the club signed a partnership deal with Machache Security, who sponsor their training equipment. A delighted Chiefs secretary Dumisani Mantula-Sibanda said the MWOS deal comes in handy at a time the club is keen on expanding its growth and attract more partners. “This relationship goes beyond money; it is a partnership that comes in to help empower Bulawayo Chiefs and help the team reach its objectives and its vision to foster professionalism and success in football.  We will share a lot with MWOS in terms of brand growth, visibility and marketing. We’re hopeful that brands Bulawayo Chiefs and MWOS will extensively enjoy the benefits of this partnership,” said Mantula-Sibanda. He said through the MWOS arrangement, the club will be able to churn out new kits for each season. The kit sponsorship deal will cascade to Chiefs’ developmental sides, including their women’s team. “This arrangement will see us gradually fully equip and dress our teams from the development side to the senior team as well as making sure that with time our fans across the globe are able to access our replicas,” said Chiefs. MWOS managing director Richard Moor said they are excited by the Chiefs partnership. “We are really glad to be teaming up with Bulawayo Chiefs. They are an energetic and ambitious club in the Premier League and they caught our eye for those very reasons. Together, we look forward to reaching the hearts and minds of sport-loving fans across the country,” said Moor. Chiefs have been aggressive in their attempt to lure corporate sponsorship, with MWOS joining Cresta Hotels, among the club’s strategic partners. – @ZililoREnds