The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
LEARNERS attending various schools in Tsholotsho District got a timely boost after Imvelo Safari Lodges group donated over 28 000 textbooks to 114 schools. The books are part of a consignment of about 70 000 textbooks that Imvelo has sourced and will be distributed to various schools where the safari operator and hotelier has a presence. The textbooks cover various subjects and are relevant to the new competence based curriculum for primary and secondary education. Princess Luphahla, a Form Four pupil at Tsholotsho High School, who is also a junior councillor, said the era of sharing textbooks could be coming to an end through the gesture by Imvelo. She was speaking on behalf of learners during a handover of the books at Tsholotsho High School early this week. “We are very grateful to Imvelo Safari Lodges as Tsholotsho High School. We appreciate these textbooks that you have given to us. We appreciate all projects you are doing for schools. These books will enhance our learning and improve the pass rate since in most cases pupils have been sharing a few books which made learning difficult,” she said. Some of the schools that have already collected their share at Tsholotsho High School where the consignment was delivered include Mathuphula, Mkhayeni, Mazibisa, Pelandaba, Nembe, Nkwizhu, Mkhubazi, Sydney Malunga, Dombo, Mhlabangubo, Nkanyiso, Jowa and Zibungululu primary schools while the secondary schools are Zibungululu, Nembe and Mavela. Others are yet to collect their consignments. The donation comes at a time when some schools have been clashing with parents who have complained about being made to pay textbook levy and at the same time asked to buy textbooks for their children. Most schools have no textbooks following change of schools syllabi. Tsholotsho Rural District Councillor for Ward 12 Gift Nkomo who received the donation on behalf of parents in the district said the gesture is a timely boost towards securing the future of children through education. “This donation is a right step towards developing the future of the child and the community. Many schools have problems of textbooks and learners have been sharing at a ratio of 1:10 while some only have a teacher’s copy and this has been compromising education delivery and pass rate. This donation came at the right time when schools need these textbooks for the new syllabus so that we improve our pass rate,” said Cllr Nkomo. Imvelo Safari Lodges projects coordinator Mr Sambulo Moyo said the hotelier runs a number of projects targeting education, community development, nutrition, orphaned and vulnerable children, conservation, water and sanitation and health in Tsholotsho and Hwange districts, with millions of dollars invested to date. Imvelo operates in Hwange and Tsholotsho and their portfolio comprise Sidinda Fishing Camp on Zambezi, Bomani Lodge in Ngamo Forest, Nehimba Lodge and Jozibanini Lodge both in Hwange National Park and Camelthon Lodge in Hwange Community area. “We value education which opens up literacy, empowerment of community and conservation which is why we donated part of the 28 000 textbooks to 114 schools in Tsholotsho district. We also have bursaries where we sponsor 30 primary, secondary and tertiary students every year among several other projects in the areas that we operate in,” said Mr Moyo. He said Imvelo has been helping schools for more than a decade, with a schools feeding programme; one of the major activities where 326 200 meals have been served to 2 400 pupils at 11 schools in Tsholotsho over the years. The organisation works with various partners locally and internationally. The organisation has built 10-double classroom blocks in Tsholotsho and furnished them, as well as other classroom blocks and teachers’ cottages in Hwange district. There are also annual conservation education programmes where teachers in Tsholotsho are trained in conservation to equip them with tourism related skills so they impart to learners since the area is a wildlife region. The business has drilled 94 boreholes in Tsholotsho. Girls are also given sanitary wear so as to reduce absenteeism as a result of menstruation related issues. Since 2011, more than 30 000 people have received dental, optometric and cataract treatment through mobile clinics run by Imvelo Safari Lodges and partners from Spain and Bulawayo. Imvelo Safari Lodges projects are in line with the Second Republic thrust of leaving no one behind and working with partners towards development of communities. – @ncubeleon