The Chronicle Michael Magoronga, Midlands Correspondent EIGHT members of the National Patriotic Front (NPF) and five from the Citizens Coalition for Change (CCC) have defected to Zanu-PF, joining a long list of people who have ditched opposition parties in favour of the ruling party. Former MDC-T stalwart, Blessing Chebundo last year opened the floodgates after defecting from the opposition to rejoin the ruling party which he served during his youth. Zanu-PF wants to reclaim Kwekwe Central and Mbizo constituencies which were won by opposition parties in 2018. Kwekwe Central became vacant following the death of the constituency’s MP Masango “Blackman” Matambanadzo in 2019, while Mbizo fell vacant following the recall of Settlement Chikwinya of CCC from Parliament. Cde John Mapurazi is Zanu-PF’s candidate in Kwekwe Central and Cde Vongaiishe Mpereri is the party’s candidate in Mbizo.
Speaking on behalf of the NPF contingent last week during the official launch of Zanu-PF’s election campaign in Kwekwe district ahead of the March 26 by elections, Cde Angela Nyathi, a former aide to the late Matambanadzo described Zanu-PF as a mother of all parties. Matambanadzo was the only legislator to win a seat on an NPF ticket in the 2018 general elections which he joined after he was expelled from Zanu-PF for misconduct. “We were isolated, on an island, in no man’s land but we are back home. We are back to apologise for what we did wrong but we are back to play our role in the building of the party and the nation,” she said. Cde Nyathi said they were ready to learn from those who remained in the party when they left, adding that the future was more important than the past. Cde Chebundo who also introduced five more members who joined Zanu-PF, said the late former Prime Minister Morgan Tsvangirai was full of praise of the new dispensation before his death. “We started seeing a transformation and a party which had a different ideology when President Emerson Mnangagwa took over.  The late Morgan Tsvangirai used to admire the way President Mnangagwa did his things and this is why it did not take me time to come back home,” he said. He said the infighting and continued splitting of the opposition MDC-T also did not help matters as there was nothing to stay for in the divided party. Zanu-PF Central Committee member, Cde Wellington Magura urged party members to welcome the new members and teach them the party strategy. He said the party should be united ahead of the March 26 by-election to ensure victory. “We want to be united and campaign together peacefully so that we attract more from opposition parties through the way we do things. We want to be a shining beacon that most parties should emulate. That way, we will win more hearts and the election,” said Cde Magura.