The Chronicle 1. You are healed of whatever disease. Spiritual or physical ailments. (pool of Bethesda experience) 2. You receive money/gold. Number 1 is the number of the river of prosperity. Pishon river was the first river that fed Adam in the garden of Eden. Genesis 2:10-12 10 A river watering the garden flowed from Eden; from there it was separated into four headwaters. 11 The name of the first is the Pishon; it winds through the entire land of Havilah, where there is gold. 12 (The gold of that land is good; aromatic resin[a] and onyx are also there.) (NIV) Pishon in Hebrew means to break loose or to spring forward. Pishon produced life giving water. It circled the land of Havilla and Havila means something that reminds us of the presence and blessing of God. Matthew 17:27 3. Spiritual birthright — a right to get the inheritance as a first-born child. No matter what circumstances you may face, do not sell your birthright. In the African culture, a first-born child is usually dedicated to ancestors or there are usually rituals that take place in the name of accepting the first-born into the world. These acts are demonic, and as a child of God, never allow your child be dedicated to such things because they will be dedicated to poverty. Do not follow family traditions but follow the laws of God. Let your child be dedicated unto the Lord. 4. You receive holiness. 5. You enter the zone of plenteousness. This is abundance. It can be through giving of first fruits, that is your first salary, first fruit from your business, farm or garden. Every church has a womb; it is the birth place of growth and multiplication. It makes future business people, multimillionaires, presidents, doctors among others who live in total abundance. 6. Thanksgiving and worship.  7. You enter the zone of honour (apostolic) and salutation (greeting). Eparatus. Romans 16:5 Likewise greet the church that is in their house. Salute my well-beloved Epaenetus, who is the first fruits of Achaia unto Christ. (KJV) 8. It allows you to enter the spiritual realm of an unlimited life, permanence and continual sustenance. 9. You enter the realm of fruitfulness — the realm of Ephraim.
God Bless. — Eaglelifeassembly’yahoo.com