The Chronicle Mbulelo Mpofu, Showbiz Reporter
MASSIVE. Huge. Epic. Humongous . . . you get the idea, right? The aforementioned words describe the mood and sentiments shared around the people when Johann Zahn and Joseph Nicephore Niepce invented a device capable of taking still or motion pictures in 1685. They would eventually call their invention the camera and this was not going to be some other invention done by someone next door. This was going to be a game-changer and that meant that auspicious events would be captured and kept for posterity through the power of the lens.  Over the years, the camera has evolved and gone through different stages from just using film to being incorporated into cellular phones where people can enjoy taking selfies all day. In the subplot of the camera revolution arose the idea of monetising the endeavour through photoshoots which are basically sessions in which a photographer takes shots of an individual or a group. Common occasions where photoshoots take place include red carpet events, weddings, baby showers, funerals, anniversaries and all kinds of parties. Usually, people dress for the occasion when they go for these photo shoots. Well . . . this is the consensus but lately, there is a new breed of daredevils who bare all in front of the camera (literally). Their dress or undress code leaves nothing to imagination. Business is booming for professional photographers as this class of people compete to see who will shoot the most controversial picture next. On January 19, Intwasa Arts Festival koBulawayo director, Raisedon Baya raised an issue through his Twitter feed, posing a question for photographers. “Dear photographers, is this not abuse of the girl child in the name of photoshoots,” he asked. What was annexed to the text were two pictures taken of an unnamed male and female who are supposedly doing “adult things” as the male is seen fondling the woman’s breasts and also dipping his hand deep into the woman’s undergarments. Speaking to Saturday Leisure, commentators expressed reservations at what has become of “today’s people.” A concerned parent from Emakhandeni who only preferred to be called SaLinda said: “This is traumatic and I cannot even imagine my children in that position. This is the decay of our moral fabric because who in their sane frame of mind would pose half-naked in front of a stranger on top of that? I’m short for words right now but it is what it is, we have fallen from grace,” he said. Mrs Alice Ngulube attributed the culture to “greediness of photographers”. “Photographers are the problem in this case. I don’t understand why someone would even take such a picture. The greed of photographers is to blame because they want to profit anyhow and consent to taking pictures of naked people just to make money. It’s disgusting really. I think photographers should look at themselves in the mirror.” These photoshoots are either done within the confines of studios or outside but the most common ones are done behind closed doors. Gordon’s main concern was on nudity in our media circles which he said was disturbing. “If we want to call a spade a spade not a garden utensil, then we are witnessing the unlawful production of blue movies right under our noses and this is disturbing. Slowly but surely, we are sinking to oblivion and before we know it, we will be in deep dire straits. “My question is, doesn’t that amount to a sort of criminal activity that needs the attention of law-enforcement agents to intervene and restore sanity among our youths?” “I think this is a punishable crime that the police should look into because these pictures keep popping up daily on social media. Something must be done to stop this free fall,” he said. A survey by the newspaper revealed that these kinds of shoots range from US$50 to US$100 for an hour in front of the camera. Amid the cries from the old guard, youths seemed not to care much about it as evidenced from Nqobani’s take. “This is no big deal really as one can choose what and when to do with their bodies. In fact, it’s not our place to judge individual decisions.” Nqobani’s sentiments were not popular with the old guard and were seen as rebellious tendencies from youths who are not subjected to authority. A Lobengula West resident who preferred anonymity expressed contempt for the photos. “This looks unclean for what some may call a sexy picture. This is trying too much to impress, but it’s not working. For me, this is socially unacceptable and should be condemned at all costs,” she said. Mai Seke from Bellevue attributed the shoots to evil spirits exerting their influence on the human race. “I personally blame the devil and encourage people to pray. Satan is working overtime and we need to pray for those who are spiritually weak not to fall prey to Satan’s machinations. This is a spiritual warfare between good and evil. These people have no shame at all,” she said. Local photographer Gideon “Gidds” Muzezewa said those types of photo shoots do not sit well with him. “I don’t feel comfortable doing them. If I would have to do them, then, I’d have to charge double for my services. Plus, I would also insist on the person in need of my services to bring a parent to guarantee consent. It’ll make me feel like I’m shooting a blue movie,” Gidds said. Owner of Brooklyn Films, photographer Tinashe “Zinjaro” Gijima distanced himself from the trend. “I don’t know those kind of photoshoots honestly and if they’re being done, well, good luck to those who do them. I’m personally unaware of them.” You are free to weigh in as well and give us your opinions on the matter via our social media handles. — @eMKlass_49