The Chronicle Angela Sibanda, Chronicle Reporter
SWITZERLAND Ambassador to Zimbabwe, Niculin Jaeger has described the National Art Gallery of Zimbabwe as a unique museum with vibrant living art. During his brief visit to the National Art Gallery in Bulawayo last week, ambassador Jaeger was taken on a tour of the building which was recently renovated. The Swiss embassy partnered the National Art Gallery to refurbish the building.  The gallery is promoting young people in the art industry through providing facilities and offering exhibition platform. Ambassador Jaeger who visited the gallery in 2019, said he was back in Bulawayo because he enjoys works of artists in Bulawayo. “I visited this place in 2019 and liked this place because it has a touch that is so different from what I have seen eslewhere. This place has a vibrant art culture, it is not just art work hanging on the walls but it’s a living culture that one can actually relate to,” he said. From the art studios that he toured, the envoy said young artists who presented their work to him had a rare talent that need to be appreciated. “These young artists are so talented, their art is just so real and from their presentations I can actually relate to the emotions and stories of their art pieces. We will continue supporting these artists and I personally love their work. This is pure talent and their skills are just unique,” he said. The gallery offers upcoming artists among them musicians, visual artists and poets, a platform to perfect their skills. It also serves as an exhibition centre for academics and has been used for exhibitions by many schools and colleges. National Art Gallery Regional Director Ms Silenkosi Moyo said the Swiss Embassy has played a pivotal role in the improvement of the gallery as well as promoting young people and women in art. “Since the establishment of our partnership with the embassy, a lot has been done to improve this gallery with their support.,” she said. Ms Moyo said through the exchange programme, young artists have had the opportunity to tour different countries and get exposed to other cultures. “This has built a strong market for the artists because most of the art collectors are from countries like Switzerland,” she said.. Ms Moyo said there is a need for locals to visit the gallery so that they appreciate local art works. “We have a lot of collections that have been here for quite some time and we have reduced some of their prices to cater for local collectors but because there are a few people who attend exhibitions and get to understand art, the art work is still with us,” said Ms Moyo . She also said the gallery has groomed a lot of great artists who, because of lack of local appreciation, have left the country in search of greener pastures. “Some of the beautiful art works displayed in the gallery were done by artists who left the country for greener pastures. There is so much talent here but we can only conserve it if we as local people learn to appreciate our own artists and their work,” she said.