The Chronicle Showbiz Reporter
Yesterday, people were shocked to learn of the death of accomplished musician, Riky Rick (real name Rikhado Muziwendlovu Makhado) who allegedly took his life at his estate home, north of Johannesburg on Wednesday morning. Several sources alleged that the Ungazincishi hit-maker hung himself with a rope after suffering from severe depression.  His last tweet read: “I will return a stronger man. This land is my home.” According to SundayWorld, a source close to the situation alleged that the talented artiste was found by his management team at his house at about 8.30am on Wednesday. They rushed him to the nearby hospital as he was still alive. “Unfortunately he died when they were en-route to the hospital,” said the source who did not want to be named.
Riky Rick (34) in 2020, publicly spoke about his struggle with drugs and mental illness saying he had started going for therapy many years earlier. He is the second South African celebrity to have died by suicide this year. This comes after veteran actor Patrick Shai was found dead in the garage of his home in January. Speaking following Riky Rick’s untimely death, the Queen of Limpopo, Makhadzi said people should spare a thought for celebrities as they encounter a lot of challenges in life and have no one to confide in as most people tend to mock them. “At this stage of life, I will never judge anyone or any celebrity who takes their own life. We don’t have people to talk to because most of the people who are our closest friends are the ones who mostly betray us. “Instead of helping us, they go around bragging about our situation just to prove that they know us better,” wrote Makhadzi on her Facebook page. She said fans are not spared as most of them have a tendency of chasing clout at the expense of celebrities. This in the process, is leading to celebrities’ compromised mental health. “When it comes to our fans, there are those ones who always want likes and shares by insulting and humiliating us with situations that we cannot change. I wish our fans knew that we’re human beings like any other human. “We feel pain like anyone especially when you find out that millions of people are making fun of a situation that you cannot change. How do you survive that if you are not strong?” quizzed Makhadzi. Makhadzi said people should learn to celebrate others when they do well and stand with them when chips are down so as to avoid people from sliding into depression. “I had money and now I don’t have it. Don’t laugh, I’m not God and I cannot predict this life, and enjoying my money is not a sin. I was driving a car, now I’m catching a taxi. Don’t ask and laugh. She doesn’t have a baby, don’t say it loud and laugh. “The finger no longer has a ring . . . she was staying in town, now she’s back home, don’t ask and laugh,” wrote Makhadzi.