The Chronicle Chronicle Reporters
Zimbabweans will today embark on a clean-up campaign around the country, with Bulawayo and Matabeleland provinces geared for the event. In December 2018, President Mnangagwa declared the first Friday of each month as the National Environment Cleaning Day when all citizens are supposed to clean their surroundings between 8AM and 10AM. In Bulawayo today, the main clean-up site will be the Centenary Park. Other sites around the city include along Herbert Chitepo between 6th and 9th Avenue and Egodini, Queens Park East Shopping Centre, Musarurwa Shopping Centre in Nketa 7, along Jason Moyo between 6th and 9th Avenue, Nketa Clinic, Vundu Hostel in Makokoba, along George Silundika from City Hall to 9th Avenue, Waterford Shopping Centre, Empompini/Hlalani Kuhle in Cowdray Park, Food for Less Shopping Centre and Tashas Shops in Emganwini. EMA Bulawayo provincial environmental manager Mrs Sithembisiwe Ndlovu said everyone must participate in the clean-up. “Clean up starts from 8AM ending at 10AM. All people are invited to participate in the clean ups. Bulawayo residents, businesses, companies, organisations or institutions are all encouraged to come out and clean dirty areas around their homes and premises,” said Mrs Ndlovu. In Matabeleland North Province, Mrs Chipo Mpofu-Zuze the provincial environmental manager said all was set for the clean-up campaign today. “Each district has its own clean up campaign and others at centres. We want people to come out and clean their surroundings and also join us. The main clean-up site will be at Mahamba Business Centre in Inyathi, Umguza will be at Ntabazinduna Centre, Lupane will be at the centre, in Binga also at the centre. For Nkayi at the centre and also Tsholotsho at the centre,” said Mrs Mpofu-Zuze. In Matabeleland South Province, the main clean-up exercise will be held at Silalatshani Business Centre in Insiza District. Villagers, workers from various government departments and members of the uniformed forces are expected to participate in the exercise. Matabeleland South Environmental Management Agency provincial manager Mr Decent Ndlovu said it was equally important to keep rural areas clean. “The main clean-up exercise will be at Silalatshani Business Centre in Insiza District and people will begin preparing for the exercise at around 7.30AM so that we start at 8AM. The clean-up exercise does not take place in urban centres only, but we’re also getting into the rural areas, service centres and everywhere else so that we spread the message on the importance of keeping the environment clean and motivate people to take care of the environment,” said Mr Ndlovu. He encouraged members of the public to be responsible and ensure the environment is clean at all times. “Let’s all come out in our numbers. Every first Friday of the month, every citizen should see it as a cause to say let’s go out and clean the environment,” said Mr Ndlovu. In Gwanda, the clean-up exercise will be held in Spitzkop North Extension and the meeting point will be Njanji Business Centre.  Gwanda acting District Development Coordinator Mr Thulani Moyo urged residents to participate in the clean-up exercise and not wait for civil servants to clean the environment for them. “The clean-up exercise is for everyone so I encourage residents to join the exercise instead of waiting on civil servants to do the work for them. We encourage everyone who produces litter, at home or at the workplace to sacrifice two hours from their schedules from 8AM to 10AM and come to the streets so that we join hands and clean up our community,” said Mr Moyo. He encouraged the business community to purchase bins to allow proper disposal of litter. “Each shop must have a bin so that litter is disposed of correctly. Let’s continue to keep our town clean,” said Mr Moyo. In the Midlands province, the clean-up campaign will be held in Amaveni suburb in Kwekwe. Midlands Provincial Affairs and Devolution Minister Larry Mavima will spearhead the national clean-up campaign that will be held at Amaveni Shopping Centre in the suburb. Environmental Management Agency (EMA) spokesperson for Midlands Province Mr Osward Ndlovu said: “All has been set for the national clean-up campaign that will be held at Amaveni Shopping Centre in Amaveni suburb in Kwekwe. Minister Mavima will lead the clean-up campaign.” Mr Ndlovu said the national clean-up is coming at a time when EMA has been carrying out a waste                 management blitz in Midlands Province that started on January 17 after noting an increase in the level of illegal dumping of litter in  business areas, residential areas and along highways. – @Yolisswa/@bonganinkunzi/ @pchitumba1