The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Reporter
SOUTH Africa’s DJ Maphorisa aka Madumane and Zimbabwe’s 13-year-old Andrea the Vocalist, have finally found each other.
The pair have agreed in principle to work together. Before coming to Zimbabwe for the recent Scorpion Kings show with Kabza DeSmall in Bulawayo, DJ Maphorisa posted a video of Andrea singing and said he was looking for him as the boy had a healing voice. “Please help me find this young man. He’s a healer,” read his caption. Posting on his social media pages last week, DJ Maphorisa was captured on a video call with the Victoria Falls-based young artiste and his mother where they were discussing the possibility of working together. “Ngithi ivoice yakho iyakhuthaza, iyakhuthaza. So siyakunika, mel’uzosiculela, sifuna ukuthi uzosiculela,” said DJ Maphorisa. A seemingly shy Andrea simply said: “Ngiyabonga.” Maphorisa continued saying he hoped Andrea’s parents would agree to his request. “Mele ngikhulume labazali bakho. I hope bazovuma ukuthi sisebenze sonke,” said DJ Maphorisa. A visibly excited Andrea’s mother said: “Uyavuma umfana”. DJ Maphorisa went on to express how excited he was to have finally found Andrea and wished him a happy birthday. The youngster, who attends the Twelve Apostles Church in Victoria Falls, trended last year after a video of him singing in church went viral. Andrea’s story is an interesting one because his singing talent was discovered after he was punished by his church pastor for bunking church service last year. He and four other boys had bunked the service to go and gather umkojompo, a wild fruit, a few hundred metres away from the homestead where the service was. When they returned, the pastor in charge of the day’s proceedings decided to punish the boys by making each of them sing in front of the congregation. Little did the pastor know that his punishment was going to be a blessing in disguise for Andrea because when it was his turn to sing, the whole crowd was moved by the song Sisendleleni Yobunzima/Uhambo. Someone captured the video of the performance, which was to go viral on TikTok where it was posted. It caught the attention of the local music industry and some in South Africa where Afro-Soul musician Aubrey Qwana quickly modified the song, which has become a hit on online music platforms. Andrea became an instant celebrity as he got over three million views on TikTok in a space of three weeks. He continues to attract thousands of followers on his Facebook and Twitter pages. South Africa-based Zimbabwean producer Tendai Joe of J Bros Entertainment also offered to manage Andrea to make sure he develops his music talent. Ever since he went viral, well-wishers have been offering to help Andrea realise his dream. The up-and-coming artiste who is in the school choir is one of the trusted singers at the Twelve Apostles Church. The second-born among four children, he started singing at the age of five and aspires to be a lawyer. – @bonganinkunzi