The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
SPORTS Leaders Institute of Zimbabwe (Sliz) has pledged to pay fees for a Caf C coaching course for a former Dynamos star living with HIV. Moved by the testimony of Julius Chimuti (not his real name), who disclosed his HIV status for the first time at a National Aids Council (NAC) sports journalists’ workshop held in Chinhoyi last week, Sliz president Russell Mhiribidi said his organisation will cater for the former footballer’s course fee. Chimuti is a holder of a Zimbabwe Soccer Coaches Association (Zisca) Level 4 badge, which used to be the highest qualification in the local scene before the introduction of Caf coaching badges.  “As Sports Leaders Institute of Zimbabwe, we take issues of capacity development of sportspeople seriously because we know that a trained individual contributes positively to the growth of the sports industry. We heard the story of Chimuti and I must say his testimony was moving and hopefully active as well as retired sportspeople will take heed of his call of knowing your status and lead responsible lifestyles,” said Mhiribidi. “Chimuti said he wants to capacitate himself and upgrade to Caf C, but that has been hindered by funding, and as Sliz, we’ve managed to get hold of Chimuti and let him know that we’ll pay for his coaching course. Since no Caf courses are happening locally, we’ve tasked Chimuti to inquire in neighbouring countries when they are having the course and if they admit him to the programme, we will pay.” The ex-DeMbare footie, who first tested positive for HIV in 2003, said his desire to coach in lower divisions was affected by lack of Caf qualifications. Chimuti yesterday expressed gratitude to Sliz for its gesture. “I attained a Zisca Level 4 coaching badge long back, but I couldn’t do the Caf C courses because of lack of funding. I’m grateful to Sliz for promising to pay for my Caf C course and I hope Zifa organises one soon, so that I may capacitate myself as I pursue my coaching dream. “Being HIV positive doesn’t affect my dreams in any way. While waiting for a Caf C course opening, I’m also considering taking up sports management courses, as that might help me get a team manager’s job if it arises,” Chimuti said. Zimbabwe last held a Caf A course in January, 2017, the same year that standardisation of coaches was implemented, affecting a number of Caf B badge holders, as they could no longer coach in the Castle Lager Premier Soccer League. Caf reportedly suspended coaching courses in order to review its course outline. The reviewed Caf C syllabus has been divided into two modules to improve the quality of coaches. Participants undergo one module for 10 days, followed by a 20-day internship programme at a club that has a Caf A licensed coach. The coaches are then handed their badges after meeting the number of hours recommended by Caf in theory, practical and internship, apart from reaching the pass mark of not less than 60 percent on the laws of the game. – @ZililoR