The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Reporter
South African acts who graced the city last year gave birth to a talent that had been covered underneath the dance circles of Bulawayo’s entertainment nightlife. Affectionately known as Mtkay Ntwana, Nkulumane-bred Mthokozisi Dube introduced himself to crowds with his “2000s” style of dressing as well as high energy on stage. His sense of style also saw him being a trendsetter on social media.  He mesmerised fans with exquisite dances at shows that were headlined by South African artistes who included DBN Gogo, Vigro Deep, DJ Maphorisa and Bootle. Watching him perform at all of the shows, it was evident that the dancer meant business. Chronicle Showbiz caught up with Mtkay Ntwana who shared how he has become, not only an internet sensation, but also a pacesetter at live shows. “I’ve been dancing for as long I started walking. My parents always told me how jovial and energetic I was whenever I danced during my childhood years. I loved dancing and would participate in anything dance-related from pre-school, Sunday School, and primary school up until now. “From the young Mtkay Ntwana, I gradually evolved through the years and started taking dance seriously and professionally,” narrated Mtkay Ntwana. He said he tries as much as possible not to box himself into one genre of dance by staying in touch with new trends in the dance world. “I wouldn’t say I have a general theme or dance genre as I’m open to trying and dancing to anything that I’m flexible to,” he said. However, like the greater part of the arts industry, Mtkay Ntwana said dance as a career is usually looked down upon leading to it not receiving the support it deserves. “Dance is looked down upon in our society as there’re hardly many names I can recall at the back of my head of dancers ‘who have made it in life from dance’ thus it’s very difficult to generate self-sustaining income through dancing alone,” he said. Mtkay Ntwana said adding salt to the wound, there are clients who underpay dancers making it hard for them to live off their talent. “To alleviate myself from some of these problems, I decided to use various social media platforms to advertise and sell my craft to a wider audience. As a result, I’ve participated in and won dance competitions, attracting clients from different spheres of life. “I’d love to think that I’m getting somewhere in this long battle that sees dancers being subjected to different forms of mistreatment,” he said. Mtkay Ntwana says his wish is to work with one of South Africa’s fast-rising musicians and dancers, Kamo Mphela. “I would someday love to work with South African dance guru Kamo Mphela as she’s talented. I know I’d learn a lot from her,” he said. Reflecting on the past year and sharing his plans for this year, the artiste said: “2021 saw my career taking long strides in terms of the various gigs that I was part of. I think much of that success should be credited to networking with relevant industry players and the hard work of the team behind Mtkay Ntwana. These people work tirelessly to make sure that I’m at the right places at the right time. “Building from the momentum from 2021, I’d like to continue doing more work in dancing, being an MC, and holding dance tutorials in different cities. My plan is to bring the dance community in Bulawayo and Zimbabwe together,” said Mtkay Ntwana. – @mthabisi_mthire.