The Chronicle Midlands Bureau Chief A 33-year-old Gweru man from Mkoba 12 suburb has been sentenced to 18 years in prison for raping a 11-year-old girl. The accused, name withheld to protect the identity of the minor, first attempted to rape the minor while she was in the bathroom before he dragged her to his room where he raped her. After that attack, he raped her several times for a month. The accused threatened to murder the complainant and to poison her mother if she revealed her ordeal to anyone. This was heard when the accused appeared before Gweru regional magistrate Mr Christopher Maturure, facing one count of attempted rape and another count of rape. The man pleaded not guilty. He was however convicted after a full trial and sentenced to 18 years in prison. Two years were suspended on condition of good behaviour. Prosecutor Mr Talent Tadenyika told the court that the complainant and the accused were staying at the same house in Mkoba 12 suburb in Gweru. The accused had his own room while the complainant was staying in the other room with her mother. The court heard that sometime in August 2020 during the day, the complainant went into the bathroom before the accused person followed her. The accused person tried to rape the girl in the bathroom but she managed to fight him off. After she was done using the bathroom, the accused saw her entering the bedroom before he knocked on the door telling her to come outside. The door was locked and the complainant did not respond. The accused person said to the complainant, ”Ukangoudza munhu chete zvandakuita ndoisira mai vako mushonga vakafa” (if you tell anyone what I did to you I will lace your mothers food with poison and she will die). The accused person again called out the complainant outside. The complainant came out of her room and the accused person held her hand and pulled her to his bedroom. The complainant told the accused to leave her alone but the accused person did not. The accused person lifted the complainant and threw her on the bed, locked the door and told her to shut her mouth. The accused person, holding a machete went to the bed and forcibly removed the complainant’s skirt and pants. The court heard that the accused removed his short trousers and raped the complaint once without protection. After the rape, the accused ordered her out of his room. When the complainant went into the bathroom she noticed some blood stains on her and took a bath. The court heard that the complainant did not tell anyone about the incident because she was afraid that the accused person would kill her mother. From that day, the accused person forced the complainant to have sexual intercourse with him and the complainant did not reveal the abuse to anyone. Whenever the accused person saw the complainant outside the house he would put his hand on his neck giving her a sign that he would kill her. In September of the same year, the complainant was asked by her mother if there was anyone who had sexually abused her after noticing some changes in her behaviour. The complainant later confided in her aunt that the accused person was sexually abusing her. A report was made to the police leading to the arrest of the accused.