The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
CHICKEN INN FC coach Joey Antipas says his side will be chasing nothing short of victory when they face visiting Tenax at Luveve Stadium this afternoon. Domestic topflight football action resumes this weekend after a two-month break with three rescheduled Match-Day 3 Castle Lager Premier Soccer League games kicking off 2022 proceedings. The match between the GameCocks and Tenax will mark the return of topflight league matches.  Chicken Inn will be hoping to close in on table-toppers Manica Diamonds when they play host to new boys Tenax who are second from the bottom of the table with just one point from their 2-2 draw against Whawha. Chicken Inn edged Cranborne Bullets 1-0 on the opening day of the season before losing 1-2 to FC Platinum in their second fixture.  Antipas emphasised on the need to kick start the year on a positive note. “The guys have been working hard at training. I would say the game against Tenax is a tricky game because we are all starting the new year. Teams have been in pre-season preparing for the start on Saturday. “All I would want is to get over the line and pick up three points. We have to fight hard to do that. We have to go out there and fight for those three points. “Of course we are not taking away anything from our opponents whom we give much respect but on the field of play we have to take the game to them. We have to win. We just want to go game by game because we do not want to promise things that we will fail to deliver at the end. The players that we bought especially in midfield will give us something extra,” said Antipas. While Antipas seems to have taken a cautious approach, his chairman Juta Tshuma on Thursday publicly declared that Chicken Inn are going for the championship come end of season. During the January transfer window, the former league champions quietly brought in Tawanda Zinaka from Bulawayo City and Brighton Ncube from Mkhokheli Dube-owned Tshabalala-based Zebra Revolution.  Midfielder Richard Hachiro joined from Caps United while Malvin Hwata joined from Cranborne Bullets. Fixtures
Saturday: Chicken Inn v Tenax (Luveve) Sunday: Bulawayo Chiefs v FC Platinum (Luveve), Black Rhinos v Caps United (Sakubva) All matches start at 3PM