The Chronicle Thandeka Moyo-Ndlovu, Senior Health Reporter 
A BULAWAYO pastor is appealing to well-wishers to help him raise US$28 000 to fund a kidney transplant for his wife who has end-stage renal disease. Seventh Day Adventist Pastor Thabo Mlotshwa’s wife, Lisa (40) fell ill last year in June and subsequent tests revealed that she has end-stage renal disease which is the final stage of chronic kidney disease. Narrating his ordeal to the Chronicle yesterday, Pastor Mlotshwa said his wife undergoes two kidney dialysis sessions weekly to stabilise the condition. She also does numerous blood transfusions to manage her blood levels and weekly erythropoietin injections and iron supplements.  Pastor Mlotshwa said while dialysis has helped, it is not a permanent solution and is not sustainable as the family spends US$230 weekly. He said given the circumstances, his wife has a five-year life span hence the decision to have a kidney transplant to save her. “It all started as swelling and after some scans and tests we discovered that my wife had kidney problems. At that time, they were functioning at eight percent and doctors recommended dialysis which is normally recommended once functionality reaches at least 25 percent. At that time doctors said acute renal failure could be temporal and managed through kidney dialysis but in November we discovered that my wife’s situation was not improving,” said Pastor Mlotshwa. He said after a series of tests they then opted for a kidney transplant whose total cost is pegged at US$28 000 in India. Pastor Mlotshwa said the quotation was the cheapest compared to having the surgery done locally or in neighbouring countries. “I am happy to say I am a match and I am willing to give her my kidney so that she can be normal again. We, however, need to raise US$28 000 for the transplant and we are appealing to well-wishers to help. I cannot wait for the transplant to be done, it will give me joy to know that at least I gave someone I love part of me to save her life,” he said. Pastor Mlotshwa said as a pastor he was expected to encourage and keep brethren hopeful but given his situation, it is difficult.
“The whole experience has taught me to lean to God more than I have done before in my life,” he said. The kidney transplant will require the couple to spend at least a month in hospital in India before they can safely travel back to Zimbabwe. “Those willing to help may reach us on +263773875300 which is registered on EcoCash as Thabo Mlotshwa or send money to Stanbic Bank, Acc Name — Thabo Mlotshwa, USD Account Number 9140004849727 Samora Machel branch, Harare. We will gladly accept help that may come as cash or funds sent through other means,” he said. — @thamamoe