The Chronicle   Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter ZIMBABWE national women’s cricket team wicketkeeper Modester Mupachikwa remains the highest T20 ranked batter according to the latest International Cricket Council (ICC) world rankings. Mupachikwa is ranked number 26 in the world with a rating of 520. She is joined in the top 100 by Chipo Mugeri on position (34), Mary-Anne Musonda (53), Sharne Mayers (61) and Josephine Nkomo (73). On the bowling side, spinner Anesu Mushangwe is the highest ranked on position 46. Right arm off break bowler Precious Marange is not far behind on position 49. Nomvelo Sibanda and Loryn Phiri also made the top 100 ranked 76 and 94, respectively. The Lady Chevrons are on a training camp as part of preparations for the ICC Women’s T20 World Cup Qualifier 2022 to be held in the United Arab Emirates in September. This will be the fifth edition of the Women’s T20 World Cup Qualifier and is a qualification tournament for the 2023 ICC Women’s T20 World Cup tournament. Participating teams will include Ireland, Bangladesh, Thailand, Scotland, Papua New Guinea, USA and UAE. The Lady Chevrons arrived in Bengaluru on Tuesday with a squad of 16 players led by captain Mary-Anne Musonda. After accepting an invitation to tour from the Omtex ICWC Cricket Institute, Zimbabwe Women will be in India for 18 days during which they will play five T20 games against local sides. They will start off with a clash against the Karnataka State Women’s Select side on Thursday. Zimbabwe Women will be in action again on Friday and on July 18, 20 and 21 July. All the matches will be played at the NICE Cricket Arena in Bengaluru. After the T20 games, the visitors will also be involved in three one-day matches against local sides. Lady Chevrons camping squad Chatonzwa Christabel, Chipare Francisca, Dhururu Chiyedza, Gwanzura Nyasha, Mavunga Michelle, Marange Precious, Mayers Sharne, Mazvishaya Audrey, Mbofana Esther, Mugeri-Tiripano Chipo, Mujaji Pellagia, Musonda Mary-Anne (captain), Ndhlovu Kelis, Phiri Loryn, Sibanda Nomvelo, Tshuma Loreen. -@innocentskizoe