The Chronicle IN the body of Christ, there is the fivefold ministry of apostle, prophet, evangelist, pastor and teacher. The purpose of the fivefold ministry is to edify, exhort, correct, rebuke, build, instruct, teach, direct and lead the body of Christ. Of the five ministries, the most contested ministry is that of the prophet, as it is greatly misunderstood and is the cause of great debates within the different Christian denominations and the body of Christ as a whole. When people do not understand something, there is a tendency to fear, question and criticise it. Hence, the many questions and debates that surround the prophetic ministry. Fear is a thief and is the opposite of faith but if you endeavour to understand and receive the truth then fear can be removed and revelation can be received. The prophetic is all about divine revelation. When people have an understanding of something, they value and believe in it with great conviction. It is my desire that as you have read this series, you will begin to understand the deeper factors that affect the fulfilment of a prophetic word both individually and at corporate levels. Let us end this series by praying this simple prayer and ask for the Lord’s guidance and wisdom, which is needed in order to understand the prophetic ministry. Later this year I will come with another series under this subject. Prayer Holy Jesus I pray today, Touch my life in the name of Jesus, Bless me Lord to understand certain things, about the Prophetic ministry, Give me the spirit of wisdom and revelation In the mighty name of Jesus Holy Spirit, open my mind and open my heart to understand these mysteries! Lord, anoint me and give me the capacity to comprehend the Prophetic Ministry I thank you Holy Lord, In Jesus’ Name. Amen. It is important to learn about the Prophetic, in order to understand how the Lord ministers to His people through this ministry. There are four crucial elements about the technicalities, legalities and practicalities of the prophetic ministry which are firstly, ignorance about this ministry; secondly, God’s will over prophecy, thirdly, human decision and lastly human error and negligence. God Bless… eaglelifeassembly@yahoo.com