The Chronicle Genesis 25:5
And Abraham gave all that he had to Isaac. But Abraham gave gifts to the sons of the concubines which Abraham had; and while he was still living he sent them eastward, away from Isaac his son, to the country of the east. (NKJV)
IN the Talmud, the Jewish Historical book, we read that Abraham laid hands on Isaac in order to transmit all he had spiritually and blessed him, but to his other children he gave gifts; material things. What would you do if your father was very wealthy and he called you and prayed and released a blessing on you but gave houses, cars and businesses to your siblings? Many would be infuriated to the point of inciting a family feud because of lack of revelation of the power of a blessing over material things. Isaac understood that he received something spiritual, something more powerful.  In the historic books of the Jewish people you will find that Isaac eventually became wealthy, he bought everything that his brothers and sisters had received from Abraham, all because of the blessing. Possessing the blessing brings escalation and produces results in every area of your lives. God desires for us to be blessed When Adam sinned against God by eating the fruit of the tree in the middle of the Garden of Eden, we lost the blessing. However God has made a way for us to reclaim our blessing because God wants us to be blessed. He is glorified when we are prosperous. If you do not believe that God wants us to be blessed and you criticize the prosperity gospel, then you will not be blessed. God is not a God of poverty. Some poor people are very dangerous because poverty can cause them to prostitute themselves, they can murder someone for a cellphone and they can even resort to stealing church offering.
Psalm 35:27 Let them shout for joy, and be glad, that favour my righteous cause: yea, let them say continually, Let the LORD be magnified, which hath pleasure in the prosperity of his servant.(KJV) It is God’s will and pleasure for his servants and people to prosper. You cannot have the blessing without being baruched. Baruch is the release of the blessing by a spoken word over your life. The word blessing comes from the word berachah which means an empowerment to prosper; God Bless.