The Chronicle We are tired of business people who do business without the anointing, God can anoint you to do business with power and people will wonder how you are selling your products. When you operate under the anointing, it attracts clients and customers to your business. You will find that where many fail to be successful, you can venture into that same sector and be successful, through the anointing.
Acts 1:8 “But you will receive power when the Holy Spirit comes on you; and you will be my witnesses in Jerusalem, and in all Judea and Samaria, and to the ends of the earth.” NIV What is that power that you receive when the Holy Spirit comes upon you? It’s called the anointing. You can have the Holy Spirit but not have the anointing, the Holy Spirit can come upon you but you may fail to have the power of the Holy Spirit upon your life. There are Christians with the Holy Spirit, but, there are some with the Holy Spirit and the power of the Holy Spirit.
Luke 24:49 “I am going to send you what my Father has promised; but stay in the city until you have been clothed with power from on high.” NIV
Jesus stopped his disciples from preaching, from going out of the upper room until they were endued or clothed with the power of the Holy Spirit. Jesus told the disciples in essence that they must not go while they are not yet anointed; one must fast and pray to achieve that. Jesus told his disciples to tarry from going out to preach until they were clothed with the power from on high. The issue was that they could not go and preach powerless, with their own ability, knowledge or with their own intelligence”. Jesus knew that when you preach to people using your own knowledge or intelligence, you are on the same level with the people you are preaching to. As a minister you ought to be at a higher level than the sheep you are sent to shepherd. After all the degrees in theology, what you really need is the anointing, for it makes you rise from an earthly level to a heavenly level, where you begin to have deeper revelation and demonstrate the miraculous power of God as Jesus Christ did and people were in awe. To be continued …
God bless …
eaglelifeassembly@yahoo.com